From msunews!agate!howland.reston.ans.net!Germany.EU.net!unibwh.unibw-hamburg.de!news.rrz.uni-hamburg.de!fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de!bontchev Thu Dec 15 23:40:37 1994
Path: msunews!agate!howland.reston.ans.net!Germany.EU.net!unibwh.unibw-hamburg.de!news.rrz.uni-hamburg.de!fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de!bontchev
From: bontchev@fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de (Vesselin Bontchev)
Newsgroups: sci.crypt,comp.security.misc,alt.security,alt.security.pgp
Subject: Real Enigma
Followup-To: sci.crypt
Date: 14 Dec 1994 15:53:02 GMT
Organization: University of Hamburg -- Germany
Lines: 165
Message-ID: <3cn4cu$c5@rzsun02.rrz.uni-hamburg.de>
NNTP-Posting-Host: fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de
Cc: frode@dxcern.cern.ch,jim@acm.org,harnisch@news.latimes.com
X-Newsreader: TIN [version 1.2 PL2]
Xref: msunews sci.crypt:34336 comp.security.misc:13360 alt.security:20621 alt.security.pgp:24616

Hello everybody,

I stopped reading USENET a few months ago, because I was too busy with
my Ph.D. I am still busy, however meanwhile a aquired something which,
I believe, would be interesting to the crypto hobbists, so I decided
to dedicate some time on this subject.

At our University, my boss, Prof. Brunnstein, has a short course on
cryptography - as a part of a larger course on computer security. He
teaches only the very trivial basics - Caesar cyphers, Vigenere,
Enigma, DES, RSA. One speech is dedicated to the German WWII encrypton
device - the Enigma. During the exercises, the students are asked to
implement a software simulation of the device.

However, none of us (including Prof. Brunnstein) has ever seen the
device, and the information about it that can be found in the books is
often contradictory and incomplete. We have found several Enigma
simulators on the net, but they are disagree with each other, and, as
I know now, they are all wrong. In particular, the program published
in "Applied Cryptography" is wrong too - it has wrong model for the
movement of the rotors, wrong model for the Ringstellung, and the
copy that you can find on 

	ftp.dsi.unimi.it:/pub/security/crypt/applied-crypto 

has also a typo.

So far, the only properly working program that I have seen is the one
published in "Machine Cryptography and Modern Cryptanalysis" by
Deavours and Kruh. Unfortunately, that program is written in BASIC,
and besides being written in a horribly language, is also written in a
horrible programming style. :-)

I got interested in the subject and did some research to figure out
how exactly did the device work - I always feel kinda silly when I
have to explain to the students something that I don't know myself.
:-) I would like to express my gratitude to Mr. Frode Weierud, whose
patient and detailled explanations and answers to my numerous
questions helped me immensely in this aspect.

Meanwhile, Prof. Brunnstein contacted the museum of BSI (the German
Information Security Agency) and they agreed to send us for a limited
time (a few months) one of their Enigmas, which is in a perfect
working order. We just received it today - by the post! Gosh, those
people really trust the post office - having in mind that the Enigmas
are a collector's item, their price is very high - I have seen numbers
like $150,000 quoted. Good thing that we have a large safe here... :-)

In exchange, we are requested to send them our program that performs
the same kind of encryption, thus simulating the device. Of course,
we'll make some public show for our students. However, I thought that
many of you might be interested to perform some kind of experiments
with the "real thing". As a minimum, you have the opportunity to
verify your simulators, you could ask questions about the mechanics of
the device and probably some other things that you have always wanted
to know, but which would never come to my mind.

For instance, I had one request for the serial number of the device.
Problem is, I can't figure out where the serial number is written. On
the front panel, just below the keyboard, there is a largish label,
which says "M 2114" - but I don't know whether this is a serial number
or a model number. There are numbers on the rotors too. Unfortunately,
we got only three rotors - I, II, and V, according to the
documentation. One of them (II) seems to be from a different machine -
the ring is made of plastic, instead of metal, and the number on it
differs from the number on the other two rotors. Those numbers are
"A19811" for rotor II and "A19771" for the other two rotors. The
reflector is C. According to a small label inside, the machine has
been produced by "Chiffriermaschinen Gesellschaft, Heimsoeth and
Rinke, Berlin-Wilmersdorf, Uhlandstrasse 136".

Here are some other facts that I have not seen mentioned in the
literature.

1) The keyboard consists of three rows: QWERTZUIO, ASDFGHJK, and
PYXCVBNML. The only difference from a contemporary German keyboard is
the placement of the keys for P and L. Also, 10 of the keys contain
numbers: Q-1, W-2, E-3, R-4, T-5, Z-6, U-7, I-8, O-9, and P-0 (that
is, those keys contain both a letter and a digit). I did not know that
the digits were used/present.

2) The whole device is very neat and actually looks pretty new. At
first I even found it hard to believe that it is an original one from
the War - I thought that is a contemporary model - so well it is
preserved! However, according to the photocopy of the original manual,
it seems that it is from 1937.

3) Replacing the rotors is definitely not a trivial task and I
seriously doubt that it has been done often - maybe once a week or at
most once a day. In order to change them, one has to unscrew to
screws, remove the lid that covers the lamps, unlock a second lid
(locked with two locks, but they don't work - i.e., are always
unlocked - on our example), pull a lever, and then very carefully
remove the batch of rotors from a rather narrow and difficult to
access place. To replace the reflector is even more difficult - there
is one additional screw to unscrew.

4) The levers that move the rotors are actually *behind* them - that
is, the layout is: plugboard, keyboard, lamps, rotor block, levers.

5) The rings on the rotors are labeled with numbers, not with letters
- so that what you see in the window of the machine is numbers, not
letters.

6) The machine uses quite a lot of plastic - something that I wouldn't
think for a device of that time. The plugs for the plugboard are made
of plastic, and the teeth of the rotors are made of plastic too. It is
that old kind of plastic that was the first one discovered - I don't
know the English name, but they call it "Backelit" here. It is hard
and of dark brown - almost black color.

The machine comes with two plugs - one is labeled for a 4V source and
one is labeled for a 220V source. However, the notice that came with
it said that we should use only the 4V source.

Things we haven't done yet:

1) We have not found a 4V source, so we have not checked whether the
lamps work and cannot preform encryption right now - this will
probably be solved tomorrow.

2) We have not checked the rotor wirings - again, we lack the proper
tools; after all we are a virus test center; not a hardware lab. In
particular, there is one contradiction between the documentation and
what I see on the rotors. The documentation says that the rotors are
markes with a Roman numeral on their side, and with a set of dots on
their perifery and those numbers must match. The markings are there,
but they do not match. :-( According to the Roman numerals, we have
rotors I, II, and V. According to the dot notation, we have the rotors
III, IV, and V respectively.

3) One of our students intends to take pictures of the device and its
parts, scan them, and then we could make the GIFs available via ftp.

OK, if you have any questions regarding the machine, or want me to
perform some experiements and post the results - feel free to ask.
Please post your requests here, instead of using e-mail, so that I
won't have to reply several times to one and the same question. Also,
please do not change the Subject: line - this will (a) allow people
who are not interested to easily kill the thread and (b) allow me to
easily follow only this thread, instead of having to read everything
in the newsgroup - something for which I, unfortunately, don't have
the time. Also, I have redirected the followups to sci.crypt - please
send your messages only to that newsgroup.

If you need to contact me privately - my address, phone, and e-mail
are in my .sig. If you need to contact my boss, his telephone is
+49-40-54715-406 and his e-mail is

	brunnstein@rz.informatik.uni-hamburg.d400.de.

However, it would be better if you don't waste his time and contact me
for any technical questions. If you live in Hamburg or somewhere
nearby, you are welcome to visit us and see the device yourself.

Regards,
Vesselin

P.S. When our program simulator is ready, I'll make it available via
anonymous ftp and will announce it here.
--
Vesselin Vladimirov Bontchev          Virus Test Center, University of Hamburg
Tel.:+49-40-54715-224, Fax: +49-40-54715-226      Fachbereich Informatik - AGN
PGP 2.6.i public key on the keyservers.      Vogt-Koelln-Strasse 30, rm. 107 C
e-mail: bontchev@fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de        22527 Hamburg, Germany

From msunews!uwm.edu!news.alpha.net!news.mathworks.com!udel!gatech!howland.reston.ans.net!Germany.EU.net!unibwh.unibw-hamburg.de!news.rrz.uni-hamburg.de!fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de!bontchev Thu Dec 15 23:42:36 1994
Path: msunews!uwm.edu!news.alpha.net!news.mathworks.com!udel!gatech!howland.reston.ans.net!Germany.EU.net!unibwh.unibw-hamburg.de!news.rrz.uni-hamburg.de!fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de!bontchev
From: bontchev@fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de (Vesselin Bontchev)
Newsgroups: sci.crypt
Subject: Re: Real Enigma
Date: 15 Dec 1994 16:52:47 GMT
Organization: University of Hamburg -- Germany
Lines: 57
Message-ID: <3cps90$aa8@rzsun02.rrz.uni-hamburg.de>
References: <3cn4cu$c5@rzsun02.rrz.uni-hamburg.de>
NNTP-Posting-Host: fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de
X-Newsreader: TIN [version 1.2 PL2]

More Enigma stuff.

First, thanks to everybody to told me how is the correct spelling of
"bakelite". :-)

I don't know whether we can get blueprints for the machine - we'll ask
the museum.

I verified the wirings of the rotors - we indeed have rotors I, II,
and V - the dot notation on them seems to be bogus.

Most of you probably know that the rotors had pins on the right side
and flat contacts on the left side - but did you know that the pins
are on springs and make electrical contact through the rotor only when
pushed down? This makes it a bit difficult to check the wirings.

The machine could use three different power supply sources. First, it
could work with a built-in battery. Ours has the empty box for it, but
not the battery itself - according to size of the box, it is something
that is not produced nowadays. The contacts for it are on some unusual
places too. Second, it could use an external AC 220V power supply - we
were warned not to use that, because it is not certain whether the
built-in transformer is still working. Third, the machine could use an
external DC 4V power supply.

Another curious thing. As it is described in the literature, the
plugboard (Steckerblatt) as twin plug holes for each letter. However,
those wholes are assymetric - one of them is larger than the other.
The plugs themselves are assymmetric too (of course), and can be
inserted only in one way. We have the full set of 13 plugs.

As I mentioned in my previous message, it is not very easy to change
the rotors, and especially the reflector. According to the specialist
at GISA, there were indeed two reflectors (B and C - we have C), but
for any particular machine, once installed, the reflector was never
changed.

Today we got a laborators power supply and tested how the machine
works. The mechanics works perfectly, but sometimes when a key is
pressed, no lamp lights up. I can't figure out what the problem is - I
have checked all lamps and they worked; have checked the wirings of
the three rotors and they work too...

Last, have you ever wondered why there are so few Enigmas available
nowadays? The Germans produced literally tens of thousands of them
during the War (one source mentiones 200,000) - because each unit had
to have one. So, where have they gone? Well, after the War, it is
known that the US military sinked in the Atlantic a whole shipload of
Enigmas - of the order of tens of thousands!

Regards,
Vesselin
--
Vesselin Vladimirov Bontchev          Virus Test Center, University of Hamburg
Tel.:+49-40-54715-224, Fax: +49-40-54715-226      Fachbereich Informatik - AGN
PGP 2.6.i public key on the keyservers.      Vogt-Koelln-Strasse 30, rm. 107 C
e-mail: bontchev@fbihh.informatik.uni-hamburg.de        22527 Hamburg, Germany

