
     The American Cryptogram Association (ACA) was organized originally to
give emphasis to the simple-substitution "cryptogram" and thus contribute
to mankind's happiness. It has grown to encompass many phases of the field
of cryptography, and makes use of both pencil-and-paper and computers.

     During the 1920's, "Detective Fiction Weekly" had a feature on cryptography
by M.E. Ohaver (SUNYAM). Dr. C.B. Warner (CHERRY BLOSSOM), and some of his
friends were attracted by the technical aspects of cryptography as a hobby,
and joined to form the American Cryptogram Association on September 1, 1929.
The ACA was at first concerned only with mono-alphabetic substitution
ciphers, termed by them "The Aristocrat of Puzzles".

     Meanwhile, in Burton, Ohio, George C. Lamb (DAMONOMAD, commonly known as
DAMON), ran the "Secret Corner" in the local newspaper. He had been reading
Ohaver's column, and was also a member of the National Puzzler's League, 
from whom we have inherited the idea of using noms-de-plume, or "noms", as
a means of bringing equality -- or at least anonymity -- to their cipher-
solving. Lamb too was concentrating on Aristocrats, and on finding that the
demand for his column was increasing, he and Warner agreed to publish a
magazine which would be the official journal of the ACA. It was to be named
"The Cryptogram".

     In 1933, "The Master Puzzler" was published, and contained the name of
Helen Fouche Gaines under her nom of PICCOLA. Her major interests were in
ciphers -- various systems of disguising text aside from the Simple
Substitution. Her first article appeared in "The Cryptogram" in December
1933, and was followed by the opening of the "Cipher Exchange" department
in that magazine. The following year, a foreign-language department was
started under the name "Xenocrypts".

     In 1936, interest having grown in ciphers and methods of breaking them,
it was suggested that the ACA should publish a text book. The contents
would be taken from the "Round Robin" lessons that had been a major method
of spreading information and practice among members, with additional
material from foreign sources and hard-to-find books. With help from many
volunteers, "Elementary Cryptanalysis" appeared for the first time in 1939,
under the editorship of Helen Fouche Gaines. The book was also dedicated
to George Lamb, who died before it appeared in print. PICCOLA died soon
after. "Elcy" was the first book of its kind to appear in English, and was
reprinted by Dover in 1956 under the title "Cryptanalysis". It remains a
standard text to this day. The ACA has since published many other booklets
on specialized subjects, all produced by volunteers among our members.

     During World War II, many ACA members were called into service; and some,
with their background of Cryptography, were fortunate in serving their
country as cryptographers and/or cryptanalysts, both in and out of uniform.

     In 1982 a regular "Computer Column" was started. In deference to those
who do not possess computers, fully developed programs are not published
in this column, but only hints and suggestions for enciphering and 
deciphering. In 1986, a "Computer Supplement" began publication; it
contains more information on computer activities.

     The ACA now has nearly 700 members all over the world. The first issue
of "The Cryptogram" in 1932 was four pages, and has grown to a 32-page 
bimonthly journal, with six major departments and a separate Computer 
Supplement. These departments include:

     "Aristocrats", most popular from the standpoint of puzzlers, are simple
substitutions using normal word divisions;

     "Patristocrsts", so named for PATRISTOCRAT (W.C. Patterson), are similar
in construction except that they do not use normal word divisions -- they
are presented in 5-letter code groups instead;

     "Cryptarithms" are mathematical problems in cipher -- letters represent
numbers;

     "Xenocrypts" are various ciphers in different foreign languages;

     "Cipher Exchange" includes several standard cipher systems and is for the
more analytical minds demanding something of a more complex nature;

     "Analyst Corner" is for those wishing to enjoy the challenge of real-world
cryptographic problems, where cipher type and clues are sparsely given.

     Progress in cryptography within the ACA has been due entirely to the
unselfish cooperation of the members, with special emphasis placed on 
certain individuals and groups who gave of time and finances. It is
unfortunate that all who played an important part in the growth of the
organization cannot be recognized here, for there are many more than the
few mentioned.

     Cryptography has been more than merely an entertainment for the enjoyment
of ingenuity. It engages the mind fully, and can provide a healthy period
of work for those unable to do much else. George Lamb was confined to a 
wheelchair, but the world of cryptography opened its content as well as
its friendships to him. It can become a harmless addiction, a passion, so
captivating are the efforts required in grappling with a problem.

     A member reminded us once that it's a nice hobby in that it can be 
enjoyed with no more equipment than a pencil and paper, and little expense
beyond postage and a subscription to the ACA.

     Cryptographers are diversified in every way. Hardly a trade or profession
has missed representation among us. Age is not a factor; we have had 
members under 10 and over 90. Formal education seems totally unrelated to 
the curious talent. The use of noms brings a degree of anonymity to the
members; only cryptography counts. We are banded together in an organization
which represents everyone with these aims: to gain the most from a study of
cryptograms, to form worth-while friendships, and to pass on the knowledge
we have been able to add to the Art.

     Once a year members and friends, experts and novices, gather at a 
Convention. Many meet for the first time, although they may be old friends
by mail. New enthusiasm is generated for the hobby as mutual help is given
and experience is shared.

     Please write for more information to: ACA Editor, One Pidgeon Drive,
Wilbraham MA 01095-2603. 

     Regular dues for first class service are: $15 per year to the USA, Canada,
Mexico. Air Overseas (AO) mail service $20 to Western Hemisphere and Europe;
Air Overseas (AO) mail service $22 to Asia-Africa (India, Israel, Mid-East)
and Pacific Rim (Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Thailand).

     Regular dies for surface mail anywhere outside North America are $17.
Annual dues of $10 are an option for those age 65+ with 10 years prior 
membership or for students under 18. An initial one-time fee of $5 is
assessed new members.

     More information on subscriptions is available from: ACA Treasurer,
Post Office Box 198, Vernon Hills IL 60061-0198.

  

  

