
                                 C I P H E R

                          Crypto-Quotes Puzzle Game
                         Release 2.0   March 7, 1991

                                Nels Anderson
                               92 Bishop Drive
                          Framingham, MA 01701-6540
                                    U.S.A.

DESCRIPTION:  CIPHER is a word puzzle game in which you must try to
discover the real meaning of a quotation or other phrase that has 
been encrypted.  To get started either read the .doc file or just
start up the game and view the help screens to learn how the game
works.

REQUIREMENTS:  CIPHER runs in 640x350, 16 color graphics mode for use
with an EGA or VGA card.  It can also run in color or monochrome text
mode, so almost any system will work.  All video modes support keyboard
play; VGA and EGA modes also supports mouse play.

SHAREWARE:  CIPHER is distributed as Shareware.  You are free to try
the game and make copies for others.  If you continue to use the
game, however, you must pay the author a registration fee of $15; in
return you'll receive a copy of the latest version of the program, a
larger collection of puzzles and possibly other software to try out.
A deluxe version with binder and printed manual is available for $22.
Disk vendors, please see VENDOR.TXT for distribution requirements.

FILES:  The files included in CIPHER v2.0 are as follows:

  CIPHER.EXE      Cipher program
  CIPHER.DOC      Documentation (instructions)
  CIPHER.TXT      This file
  NEWS.PCC        Title picture
  PUZZLE1.CPZ     Puzzle data file
  ORDERFRM.TXT    A ready to print registration form
  SHAREWRE.TXT    Information on Shareware
  VENDOR.TXT      Information for disk vendors, user groups, BBSes

All these files MUST be included when distributing this program.  If you
archive the program for distribution through BBS's, please use the name
CIPHER20.ZIP (or .LZH, .PAK, etc. as appropriate).

SUPPORT:  Support for this software is provided through the )(evious BBS.
Call 508-875-3618 or 617-449-7322 (300/1200/2400/9600HST, 8N1) and leave
a C)omment for the sysop.  The latest version will always be available
there first.  Mail support is also available; please include an SASE with
your request.  You can contact the author through CompuServe's mail
system.  Address to Nels Anderson [71020,2613].  Finally, you can send
messages via Internet to address 71020.2613@compuserve.com.

AVAILABLE SOFTWARE:  Other software which I've either written or
contributed to:

EGATREK:   Space strategy battle game, using full EGA graphics.
           Based on the classic star trek type games, including
           maps, graphics, communications and even a view outside
           the ship.  Winner of Public Brand Software's 1988
           software contest.

           "...simply an amazing program, full of surprises and
           strategic challenges."
             -- ProGamer Magazine, Series 2, Volume 8

           "EGATrek is such a well-designed game, if you don't have
           EGA hardware, it's a good reason to upgrade."
             -- Shareware Magazine, July-August 1990

MAHJONGG:  Addictive solitaire game played with Chinese tiles.  Very
           easy to learn but always a challenge to win.  Many game
           options including timed games, tournaments, etc.  Also
           allows loading optional tile sets (tile editor included).
           Supports EGA and Hercules graphics; mouse optional.

           "Gorgeous board and tiles, challenging and addictive play."
             -- PCWorld Magazine, December 1988

           "...a visual feast and a mental workout."
             -- Compute! Magazine, April 1989

TILESETS:  Several collections of tile sets created by various
           Mah Jongg fans are available.  Each collection includes
           at least ten tile sets.  Requires Mah Jongg v3.3 or later.

CIPHER:    A word puzzle game, yet it uses hi-res VGA or EGA graphics
           for displays (mouse optional).  Also will run in text mode.
           Includes over 30 puzzles to solve; registered version comes
           with over 200 additional puzzles.  You can also enter your
           own already encrypted puzzles.

SHOOT:     "Shooting Gallery" is a colorful arcade game with several
           different rounds to test your aim and reflexes, including
           skeet, quick draw, carnival type shooting range and a wild 
           west shootout.  Uses 320x200, 256 color mode and a mouse to
           play.  Requires VGA or MCGA.

           "Shooting Gallery is seven rounds of pure fun!"
             -- Patrick Grote

           "...one of the most entertaining, colorful, action-packed
           and challenging games I have seen."
             -- Vulcan's Compute Monthly, August 1990

SUPERFLY:  An action game using hi-res EGA/VGA graphics.  Chase the
           flies and other insects through twenty different rounds.
           Includes three levels of difficulty, hall of fame, shell
           to DOS, etc.

           "RATING: 10.0" (highest rating)
             -- Patrick Grote

MOUSTOOL:  A collection of utilities for Turbo Pascal programmers
           wishing to incorporate mouse input in their programs.
           Sample programs included for both EGA and CGA graphics.

SOUNDPAS:  A collection of utilities for Turbo Pascal programmers
           to add music and sound effects to their programs.  Includes
           units for interrupt and real time sounds.
 
BASSTOUR:  (Written by Dick Olsen).  Game that simulates a fishing
           tournament, including rod and lure selection.  Runs in
           EGA/CGA/Hercules graphics modes.  Uses many of the
           utilities from MOUSTOOL.  Do not order this game from
           me; for more information contact:  Richard Olsen, 68
           Hartwell Avenue, Littleton, MA 01460.

BASSMAP:   Companion program for BassTour which allows lakes to be
           created or modified.  EGA and CGA versions provided.
           Requires BassTour or Bass Class.

These programs are probably available on your favorite BBS or from
your favorite disk vendors.  To register them or to order direct, use
the form in the file "orderfrm.txt" which is all ready to print.  The
"deluxe" version includes the registered software on diskette, plus a
binder and printed manual (some programs also include quick reference
cards).  The standard version includes just the diskette with the
registered software.  You can also use your VISA or MasterCard to
order on-line thru the support BBS, Xevious, at 508-875-3618.  Use
the command "DOOR 15" to order.

                                  - - - - -

  Cipher is copyright (c) 1990-1991 by Nels Anderson.  All rights reserved.

                         _______
                    ____|__     |               (R)
                 --|       |    |-------------------
                   |   ____|__  |  Association of
                   |  |       |_|  Shareware
                   |__|   o   |    Professionals
                 -----|   |   |---------------------
                      |___|___|    MEMBER
     
