
                                   CIPHER
                          Crypto-Quotes Puzzle Game
                         Release 2.0   March 7, 1991
                     Copyright 1990-1991 by Nels Anderson
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Nels Anderson
                               92 Bishop Drive
                          Framingham, MA 01701-6540
                                    U.S.A.

                          Xevious BBS: 508-875-3618
                           CompuServe: 71020, 2613


This file contains information for disk vendors, BBS sysops, user groups,
etc. who wish to distribute this program.  For the purposes of this
document, all of the above will be referred to as disk vendors.

This software is copyrighted material and is subject to certain restrictions
on copying and distribution.

Vendors of any type, whether program distribution is free or whether a fee
of any type is charged, may distribute this program under the following
conditions:

    - The vendor is an associate member of the Association of Shareware 
      Professionals and follows the requirements of such membership. Or if
      not an ASP member, the vendor properly represents the software as
      shareware and provides customers with a complete definition of the
      shareware concept.  You must not advertise this software as "free",
      "cheap" or "public domain".

    - The vendor must in no way imply that they are "selling" the program
      but rather are only providing a duplication service where the program
      is provided for evaluation.  You may not "rent" or "lease" copies of
      this program.

    - You do not rename, change or omit any of the provided files.

    - For profit vendors should provide the author with a copy of their
      catalog (BBSes and user groups would generally be considered not-
      for-profit vendors).

    - You may distribute this program in a compressed form.  You may also
      include your own text files, "go.bat" startup files, etc. along with
      the program.

If you indicate ASP membership in your catalog, please do so for your
listing of this program.

The author reserves the right to withhold or withdraw permission to
distribute from anyone at any time for any reason.

Software reviewers: If you plan to review this software for publication,
please contact me first to make sure you have the most recent version of
the product and that the ordering information supplied to your readers
will be accurate.


Program:	Cipher
Version:	2.0
Size:		8 files, 183k
BBS file name:  CIPHER20.ZIP
To run, type:	cipher
Registration:	$15 ($22 for printed manual/binder)
		additional puzzle disks available for $5 each
Program Type:	Word puzzle game
Monitor Type:	VGA/EGA/text mode (color or mono); best on VGA/EGA
Mouse:		Yes (optional; VGA/EGA modes only)

One line description:  Word puzzle game in colorful hi-res graphics mode

Short description: A crypto-quotes type word puzzle game updated to support
hi-res EGA and VGA graphics though it also supports text modes.  Very
colorful in graphics modes.  Includes one set of puzzles or enter your own.

Detailed description:

Cipher is a crypto-quotes type game, updated to support hi-res EGA and VGA
graphics and mouse play.  It includes many puzzles to solve plus options
such as help, hints, save/restore, etc.  You can also create your own
puzzle files.  All game play can be done with a mouse or with the keyboard
according to the players preferences.

