From msuinfo!agate!ihnp4.ucsd.edu!mvb.saic.com!MathWorks.Com!europa.eng.gtefsd.com!howland.reston.ans.net!pipex!dircon!mikeb Thu Sep 29 21:41:24 1994
Path: msuinfo!agate!ihnp4.ucsd.edu!mvb.saic.com!MathWorks.Com!europa.eng.gtefsd.com!howland.reston.ans.net!pipex!dircon!mikeb
From: mikeb@tdc.dircon.co.uk (Michael Barney)
Newsgroups: sci.crypt,talk.politics.crypto
Subject: Re: <alleged>Crypto AG Schennagans on Swiss Radio International
Followup-To: sci.crypt,talk.politics.crypto
Date: 28 Sep 1994 08:15:22 GMT
Organization: The Direct Connection
Lines: 260
Message-ID: <36b8mq$kse@newsgate.dircon.co.uk>
References: <3691hl$qj1@newsgate.dircon.co.uk>
NNTP-Posting-Host: tdc.dircon.co.uk
X-Newsreader: TIN [version 1.2 PL2]
Xref: msuinfo sci.crypt:32643 talk.politics.crypto:7670

Michael Barney (mikeb@tdc.dircon.co.uk) wrote:
No more request for individual copies please.  Here it is.  Make up your 
own mind.
Mike Barney



The following is the <alleged> transcript from Hans Buehler on Swiss 
Radio 
International.  It was <allegedly> relayed on "Echo Der eit", Radio DRS, 
on 
4/7/94 at 1845 Hour.


This is Swiss Radio International. <music>
SRI is on the air via Satellite and Shortwave.
News and Current Affairs on the Hour, Feature Programs on the Half Hour.
Stay tuned for Rondevous. <music>

People and places in Switzerland. <music>
Hello and welcome to Rondevous from Swiss Radio International. I'm James 
Mason.   Later in the program we bring you up to date with the case of 
Hans 
Buehler, the Swiss Telecommunications Engineer who spent 9 months in an 
Iranian 
Jail on spying charges and has been trying to find out the real reason 
behind 
his arrest and detention.
<break>
<music>

You're listening to Rondevous, from Swiss Radio International.  I'm James 
Mason.  Back in May you may have heard a Sunday feature program from SRI 
about 
the strange case of Hans Buehler.  Hans Buehler is the Swiss 
Telecommunications 
Engineer who used to work for a Swiss company called Crypto.  Crypto, 
based at 
Steinhausen in Canton Zug, is one of the worlds leading manufacturers' of 
enciphering equipment used by governments, ministries, militiary forces 
and 
intelligence services all over the world to scramble their communications 
so 
they can't be intercepted and read by unauthorized third parties.  In 
1992 Mr. 
Buehler, then one of Crypto's most successful technical salesmen,  was 
arrested 
while on his 24th sales trip to Iran.  He was charged with spying and 
spent 9 
months in solitary confinement in an Iranian military jail. 

...<Interview with Daughter Deleted>...
<Moderator>  Hans Buehler's daughter, Christina.  Crypto had paid 
$1Million 
bail for Hans Buehler's release.  He returned to Switzerland in January 
last 
year, but his career was destroyed when Crypto fired him a few weeks 
after his 
return.  Since then, Mr. Buehler has spent all his time researching, 
trying to 
find the real reason behind his arrest and dismissal.  Earlier this year, 
sensational information reported in the Swiss media
put Mr. Buehler's case in an entirely new light.  A documentary on Swiss 
Television and also a book about Mr. Buehler's case suggested that Crypto 
was 
really German controlled, and that the enciphering machines were being 
manipulated by American and German intelligence services, so encoded 
messages 
could be intercepted and read.  Mr. Buehler now believes the Iranians 
suspected 
they had been sold manipulated machines, and arrested him to try and get 
more 
information.  Mr. Buhler says he then believed he was working for a Swiss 
company selling clean machines.  In May, while on his way to the Geneva 
book 
show to promote the book about his case, Mr. Buehler said, "We have new 
information that my former employer for years carried out intelligence 
activities".    This sentence was published by the Swiss Magazine 
"Sweitzer 
Illustrater<sp?>"  .  Crypto then took Mr. Buehler and the Magazine's 
publishers to court,  seeking a ban on Mr. Buehler repeating this 
sentence.  I 
asked Mr. Buehler himself to take up the story.

<Hans Buehler>  Crypto has made a complaint against me and the publisher 
of a 
well known  Swiss weekly magazine the "Sweitzer Illustrater<sp?>" and 
they 
quote that I have said while I was on the train to Geneva from Zurich on 
the 
way to Geneva to present this new book "Ver Schulluselt" of the Case of 
Hans 
Buehler, that I have said we have new information that Crypto has been 
active 
in intellegence for many years.  Something like this.

<Moderator>  "Did you actually say that?"
<Hans Buehler>  Yes, I have said it one way in one form or the other, but 
I 
will stand with the general intrepretation of this.  You can imagine that 
when 
I say something like this that I probably have received alot of 
information to 
substantiate it. 
<Moderator>  This is a pretty serious allegation that your saying that 
your 
former employer enagaged in intelligence activities.  What concrete 
evidence 
and proof will you put forward to substantiate this?

<Hans Buehler> Well when we go to court I will be represented  by my 
lawyer, 
so I shall name to the charge the names of the persons that have given me 
such 
information, and I shall name to the court the type of equipment involved 
specifically, and other people will be called up because it says we, not 
just 
Hans Buehler, will possibly be called up 
to court and they will have to confirm they have said it to me.  If they 
say 
they havn't said it to me then there are others and we will go into cross 
examination.
<Moderator> Earlier this year, Swiss Television made a documentary on 
your 
case and they traced the ownership of Crypto to Germany and alleged it 
was 
really controlled by the German intelligence services, they also said 
that 
Crypto was selling manipulated enciphering machines.  Why didn't Crypto 
take 
action then, why have they waited until now to take you to court?

<Hans Buehler> Well Swiss National television was very very suprised that 
Crypto did not complain against this long television program, this 
documentary. 
 It seems that Crypto would like to keep all of this low key, because 
otherwise 
they must absolutely  defend themselves, because if you leave such thing 
unanswered in the world, this is terrible.  Crypto has asked the German 
Magazine that had a lenghty article on the case of Hans Buehler and this 
was 
entitled "Espionage", much harder still than just manipulated equipment, 
they 
havn't done anything against them.  Neither, they have ask them to 
publish a 
letter showing the position of Crypto and of course putting in a 
disclamer.  
The German magazine, the lawyers of the German magazine or the appointed 
lawyers of the German magazine "Focus" they just wrote to Crypto a couple 
of 
lines and, "look this article was well researched and it is true".  With 
this 
Crypto left it at that.  

But now, Crypto has found a sentence of Hans Buehler presenting his book 
in 
Geneva , a well accepted book, by the well and very factual, as a matter 
of 
fact Crypto has given it free of charge to their sales engineers because 
the 
book just explains things and the epilogue written by myself actually 
says, and 
it was written in December 1993, I cannot understand such allegations 
that 
Crypto equipment could have been manipulated,  but then in the Spring of 
1994 
after watching the TV newsreel, of reading in the press,  the allegations 
substianted of all the information I got, I unfortunately came to the 
conclusion there was more behind the story.  

<Moderator> At your press conference in Zurich before your court 
appearance, 
you said there are people, specifically one person present in Crypto who 
has 
known about manipulating machines since 1970.  Is that correct?

<Hans Buehler> Yes, or actually even before.    Actually there are 
several 
people.  There are people who have very good knowledge of manipulated 
equipment, but again lets look at this very carefully.  First of all, 
there are 
people who used to work for Crypto who have very profound knowledge of 
how it 
was done also, and there are people still working for Crypto  who have 
profound 
knowledge of it and they have people who Crypto have only dismissed.  

Now the people who have given me this information, of course the question 
is, 
why do they give me such information?  Because basically they have 
nothing to 
do with me.  Why should they tell me "Look I have knowledge that Crypto 
is 
making equipment that is not as good as it could be.  Why did they tell 
me 
that?  

Well they have been so hurt also personally, when they understood how 
Crypto 
has let me fall when I was in Iran when they wanted my Family to agree or 
me 
actually to agree to pay $1M bail.  The way they have treated me when I 
returned when they fired me when I was on holidays they have written me 
letters 
that I was not allowed to speak with people of Crypto again, old 
friends.  
When, they actually told me that I owed them all the bail money and I 
owed them 
all the expenses that was going to be millions if you say they had a 
couple of 
people which they put on my case, lawyers, and then they <other Crypto 
employees implied> say enough is enough, I'm going to talk, I'm going to 
help 
Hans, and they told me.  The following I'm going to tell you, I tell you 
because I want to help you so you understand there is much more possibly 
behind 
your story, your arrest, or at least your dismissal from the company.  
And they 
said also, and if necessary, if you need my help in court, I will come.  

<Moderator>  Well Mr. Buehler, the publisher "Ringyea<sp?>" and Crypto all 
went 
before the District Court in Zurich on July 5th <1994>, and presented 
their 
cases before the judge.  On Monday this week, Mr. Buehler's lawyer 
received the 
judges verdict in writing.  She ruled that for the time being, Mr. 
Buehler 
cannot repeat the sentence about having new infomation that his former 
employer 
was long engaged in intelligence activities.  But she dismissed Crypto's 
complaint against the publisher "Ringyea"  Crypto now has 1 month in 
which to 
lodge a formal complaint against Mr. Buehler.  Mr. Buehler told SRI this 
week, 
that if he's taken to court again, he'll then call forth witnesses and 
submit 
proof about his allegations.

<Music>
Youre listneing to Rendevous from Swiss Radio International.  I'm James 
Mason.
<Music>


FYI:   Here are the specifics on the book:

Title: Ver Schlusselt (Ciphered)
Author:  Res Strehle (ghost writer for Hans Buehler)
IBSN#:  3_85932_141_2
Publisher:  Werd Verlag (Zurich)
Approximately US$61 each,10-12 weeks for delivery.  German only.




Does anyone have a copy of the article or a video tape of the Swiss TV 
Program?  Please let me know.

Michael Barney

