The Clipper Chip: Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)


What is the Clipper Chip?

	It is a cryptographic device purportedly intended to protect 
private communications while at the same time permitting government 
agents to obtain the "keys" upon presentation of what has been vaguely 
characterized as "legal authorization."  The "keys" would be held by two 
government "escrow agents" and would enable the government to access the 
encrypted private communication.  While Clipper would be used to encrypt 
voice transmissions, a similar device known as Capstone would be used to 
encrypt data.

Who developed the underlying technology?

	The cryptographic algorithm, known as Skipjack, was developed by 
the National Security Agency (NSA), a super-secret military intelligence 
agency responsible for intercepting foreign government communications 
and breaking the codes that protect such transmissions.  In 1987, 
Congress passed the Computer Security Act, a law intended to limit NSA's 
role in developing standards for the civilian communications system.  In 
spite of that legislation, the agency has played a leading role in the 
Clipper initiative and other civilian security proposals.  NSA has 
classified the Skipjack algorithm on national security grounds, thus 
precluding independent evaluation of the system's strength.  CPSR has 
filed suit under the Freedom of Information Act seeking the disclosure 
of the secret algorithm and other information concerning the Clipper 
plan.

What is the government's rationale for Clipper?

	The key-escrow system was developed at the urging of the FBI and 
other law enforcement agencies, which claim that the increasing 
availability of strong encryption programs will interfere with their 
ability to conduct wiretapping.  No evidence in support of these claims 
has been released -- in fact, FBI documents obtained through litigation 
by CPSR indicate that no such difficulties have been reported by FBI 
field offices or other federal law enforcement agencies.

How important is wiretapping to law enforcement agencies?

	Electronic surveillance is just one of many investigative 
techniques available to law enforcement.  In fact, it is not a widely 
used technique -- in 1992, fewer than 900 wiretap warrants were issued 
to state and federal law enforcement agencies.  It is to protect the 
viability of that small number of wiretaps from an unsubstantiated risk 
that the FBI and NSA have proposed to compromise the security of 
billions of electronic transactions.

What is the current status of the Clipper plan?

	On February 4, the Administration announced the formal adoption of 
the "Escrowed Encryption Standard," which is the technical specification 
for the Clipper system.  This action means that Clipper will become the 
encryption standard within the government -- all cryptographic products 
for government use must comply with the standard (i.e., contain the key-
escrow mechanism) and all individuals and businesses wishing to transmit 
secure communications to government agencies will eventually be obliged 
to use the NSA-developed technology.

Will the Clipper standard become mandatory?

	The Administration maintains that Clipper will be a "voluntary" 
standard outside of the government, but many industry observers question 
the reality of this claim.  The government exerts enormous pressure in 
the marketplace, and it is unlikely that alternative means of encryption 
will remain viable.  Further, the possibility of Clipper becoming 
mandatory at some time in the future is quite real given the underlying 
rationale for the system.  If criminals do, indeed, intend to use 
encryption to evade electronic surveillance, they are unlikely to 
voluntarily use the Clipper technology.

What can I do to oppose Clipper?

	Sign the electronic petition against the Clipper plan that is 
being organized by CPSR.  Stay informed of relevant developments by 
reading the CPSR Alert and other periodic announcements.  And consider 
lending your financial support to CPSR's campaign to protect the privacy 
of electronic communications.


       -------------------------------------------------------------
