From jim@RSA.COM Thu Mar  3 17:37:18 1994
Received: from RSA.COM by scss3.cl.msu.edu (4.1/4.7)  id AA11510; Thu, 3 Mar 94 17:37:14 EST
Received: by RSA.COM 
	id AA24294; Thu, 3 Mar 94 14:33:08 PST
Date: Thu, 3 Mar 94 14:33:08 PST
From: jim@RSA.COM (Jim Bidzos)
Message-Id: <9403032233.AA24294@RSA.COM>
To: mrr@scss3.cl.msu.edu, raylau@mit.edu, cme@ellisun.sw.stratus.com
Subject: FYI
Status: OR



Submitted to risks.

SOME THOUGHTS ON CLIPPER, NSA, AND ONE KEY ESCROW ALTERNATIVE

In a recent editorial, Dr. Dorothy Denning of Georgtown University
argued in support of the U.S. government's proposed Clipper Chip, a
security device that would allow law enforcement to decipher the
communications of users of such devices.

Dr. Denning attempts to argue that Clipper is necessary for law
enforcement agencies to be able to do their job.  I'm not going to
argue that one; there are plenty of people who can argue that
compromising privacy for all citizens in order 	to aid law enforcement
is a bad idea more effectively than I, particularly in the Clipper
case, where the arguments from law enforcement are dubious at best.
(The current justification is inadequate; there may be better reasons,
from a law enforcement perspective, but we haven't heard them yet.)

Without doubt, law enforcement and intelligence are huge stakeholders
in the debate over encryption. But every individual and corporation in
the U.S. must be included as well. Are NSA's actions really in the
best interests of all the stakeholders? Are there alternatives to the
current key escrow program?

If one steps back and looks at what has happened over the last few
years, one might well question the approaches, if not the motivation.
(I believe it may even be possible to conclude that Clipper is the
visible portion of a large-scale covert operation on U.S. soil by the
National Security Agency.) Over a number of years, through their
subversion of the Commerce Department (who should be championing the
causes of U.S.  industry, not the intelligence agencies), NSA has
managed to put many U.S. government resources normally beyond their
control, both legally and practically, to work on their program of
making U.S. and international communications accessible. 

The first step was the MOU (Memorandum of Understanding) between NIST
NSA.  This document appears to contravene the provisions of the
Computer Security Act of 1987, the intent of which was to give NIST
control over standards-making for the unclassified government and
commercial sectors.  The MOU essentially gave NSA a veto over any
proposals for crypto standards by NIST.

By using the standards making authority of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), NSA is attempting to force the entire
U.S.  government to purchase Clipper equipment since only
NIST-standard equipment may be purchased by government agencies. This
purchasing power can then be used to force U.S. manufacturers to build
Clipper products or risk losing government business.  (GSA is
currently questioning NSA's authority to control government-wide
procurement, and should continue to do so.)  This of course not only
subsidizes Clipper products, but could make Clipper a de facto
standard if the costs associated with alternatives are too high.
These costs to industry, of ignoring Clipper, come in the form of lost
government market share, costly support for multiple versions of
incompatible products, and non-exportability of non-Clipper products.

It also appears that NSA is desperately seeking a digital signature
standard that would force users to take that signature capability
wrapped up with a Clipper chip.  If this is the case, as it appears to
be, then NSA has is trying to use what is probably the most powerful
business tool of the information age as a means to deny us its
benefits unless we subsidize and accept Clipper in the process.  This
would, if true, be an unprecedented abuse of government power to
influence U.S.  industry and control individual privacy.  (Clipper is
part of a chip called Capstone, which is where their proposed digital
signature standard would be used.)

The overall cost of these policies is unknown.  We only know that NSA
has spent a considerable amount of money on the program directly.
Other costs are not so obvious. They are: 

- A burdened U.S. industry, which will have to build multiple products
or more expensive products that support multiple techniques;

- A low-intensity "trade war" with the rest of the world over
encryption;

- Lost sales to U.S. companies, since international buyers will surely
go to non-U.S. suppliers for non- Clipper encryption, as may buyers in
the U.S.;

- Potential abuses by government and loss of privacy for all citizens.

Does NSA truly believe they can displace other methods with Clipper?
With over three million RSA products, the technology they feel
threatened by, in use in the U.S. today? Not likely; therefore, they
have already decided that these costs are acceptable even if they only
delay the inevitable, and that U.S. industry and U.S. taxpayers should
bear these costs, whatever they are.  This policy was apparently
developed by unelected people who operate without oversight or
accountability.  Does the White House really support this policy?
(Does this all sound familiar?)

It has been rumored that NSA will gain support from foreign
governments for escrow technology, especially if "local control" is
provided.  Even if NSA can convince their sister organizations around
the world to support key escrow (by offering Clipper technology with a
do-your-own-escrow option), will these other governments succeed in
selling it to their industry and citizens?  Most countries around the
world have much stronger privacy laws and a longer history of
individual privacy than the U.S.

WHY AGAIN WHEN IT DIDN'T WORK THE FIRST TIME?

Many seem to have forgotten or are not aware that the Clipper program
is not new, and it's also not the first time NSA has attempted to
force communications security on U.S. industry that it could
compromise.  In the mid-80's, NSA introduced a program called the
Commercial COMSEC Endorsement Program, or CCEP. CCEP was essentially
Clipper in a black box, since the technology was not sufficiently
advanced to build lower-cost chips.  Vendors would join CCEP (with the
proper security clearances) and be authorized to incorporate
classified algorithms into communications systems.  NSA had proposed
that they themselves would actually provide the keys to end-users of
such systems.  The new twist is access by key escrow.

To see how little things have changed, consider this quote: "...RSA
Data Security, Inc.  asserts that since CCEP-2 is not published and
therefore cannot be inspected by third parties, the NSA could put a
'trap door' in the algorithm that would enable the agency to inspect
information transmitted by the private sector.  When contacted, NSA
representative Cynthia Beck said that it was the agency's policy not
to comment on such matters."  That was in 1987. ("The Federal Snags in
Encryption Technology," Computer and Communications Decisions, July
1987, pp.  58-60.)

To understand NSA's thinking, and the danger of their policies,
consider the reply of a senior NSA official when he was asked by a
reporter for the Wall Street Journal if NSA, through the CCEP program,
could read anyone's communications: "Technically, if someone bought
our device and we made the keys and made a copy, sure we could listen
in. But we have better things to do with our time." (The Wall Street
Journal, March 28, 1988, page 1, column 1, "A Supersecret Agency Finds
Selling Secrecy to Others Isn't Easy," by Bob Davis.) Another NSA
official, in the same Journal story, said "The American Public has no
problem with relying on us to provide the technology that prevents the
unauthorized launch of nuclear weapons. If you trust us to protect
against that, you can trust us to protect private records."  Remember
that the Cold War was still on at that time.  Maybe they're not so
busy today.

Law enforcement and intelligence gathering are certainly impeded by
the use of cryptography.  There are certainly legitimate concerns that
these interests have.  But is the current approach really the way to
gain support?  People with a strong military and intelligence bias are
making all the decisions. There seem to be better ways to strike a
balance.

AN ALTERNATIVE PROPOSAL

One approach would be to have NIST develop a standard with three
levels.  The first level could specify the use of public-key for key
management and signatures without any key escrow.  There could be a
"Level II" compliance that adds government key escrow to message
preparation.  "Level III" could be key escrow controlled by the user,
typically a corporation.  Would this work? The first level, meeting
the standard by itself, would back up the government's claim that key
escrow is voluntary; if I want privacy and authentication without key
escrow, then I can have it, as the government has claimed I can.
Actions speak louder than words.

Why would any vendors support Level II?  They would find a market in
the government. (I would certainly like our public servants to use key
escrow, just as I want work product paid for by my corporation to be
accessible.)  So the government can still influence the private sector
by buying only products that include Level II compliance. Also, Level
II products would be decontrolled for export. The market can decide;
vendors will do what their customers tell them to.  This satisifies
the obvious desire on the part of the government to influence what
happens, as a consumer.

Level III would allow any user to insert escrow keys they control into
the process.  (Level II would not be a prerequisite to Level III.) My
company may want key escrow; I, as an individual, may want to escrow
my keys with my attorney or family members; a standard supporting
these funtions would be useful.  I don't necessarily want or need the
government involved.  

NIST already knows how to write a FIPS that describes software and
hardware implementations, and to certify that implementations are
correct.

This approach cetainly isn't perfect, but if the adminsitration really
believes what it says and means it, then I submit that this is an
improvement over a single key escrow FIPS foisted on everyone by NSA,
and would stand a much better chance of striking a workable balance
between the needs of the government and the right of individuals to
privacy.  Therefore, it RISKS much less than the current plan.

The real problem with the way NSA works is that we don't find out what
they're really doing and planning for decades, even when they're
wrong.  What if they are?  

In the 60's and 70's, the CIA was out of control, and the Congress,
after extensive hearings that detailed some of the abuses of power by
the CIA, finally moved to force more accountability and oversight.  In
the 80's and 90's, NSA's activities should be equally scrutinized by a
concerned Congress.







