From msuinfo!agate!howland.reston.ans.net!pipex!demon!oxted.demon.co.uk!georgefoot Tue Nov 16 21:56:11 1993
Path: msuinfo!agate!howland.reston.ans.net!pipex!demon!oxted.demon.co.uk!georgefoot
Newsgroups: sci.crypt
From: georgefoot@oxted.demon.co.uk (George Foot)
Reply-To: georgefoot@oxted.demon.co.uk
Subject: QS - A New Cryptosystem
X-Mailer: ReaderS for the Acorn Archimedes
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 1993 14:41:36 +0000
Message-ID: <931116144136@oxted.demon.co.uk>
Sender: usenet@demon.co.uk
Lines: 603

 
 
                                           16th November 1993
 
From  George Foot   georgefoot@oxted.demon.co.uk
 
 
 
             A NEW AND IMPROVED PUBLIC KEY CRYPTOSYSTEM         
 
 
The Co-Inventors 
 
                    Roger Sewell and George Foot
 
          have pleasure in announcing a new and innovative 
 
                    PUBLIC KEY CRYPTOSYSTEM
 
                     which has been named 
 
                            QS
 
 
This cryptosystem is protected by patent application GB 2 264 423 A which
was published on August 25th. 1993 and also by applications for worldwide 
patents. 
 
 
 
IN SUMMARY, CRYPTOSYSTEM QS HAS THE FOLLOWING PROPERTIES AND ADVANTAGES:
 
 
Secure transmission and storage of text, data, speech, fax and video:
 
Provides the highest standards of security with assurance of 
privacy. authenticity and integrity of all communications during 
transmission and when stored.
 
 
Operation at high speeds:
 
20 Megabits/sec in hardware implementations or 40 Kilobits/sec
in software.
 
The speed of QS permits simple solutions for many applications 
which would not otherwise be possible at this high level of 
security.
 
 
Integral hash function:
 
QS inherently provides an integral hash function from which  digital
signatures are derived without additional computation.
 
Alternatively, a digital signature without encryption is 
available.
 
 
Security related to RSA by precise theorems.
 
QS has all the features available in other cryptosystems 
including RSA the renowned public key system.
  
Moreover, theorems can be stated and proved which establish a 
precise relationship between the security of QS and that of RSA. 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION:
 
 
Cryptosystems have been proposed which employ RSA for the secure 
transmission of keys in an initial phase of the communication of a 
message but revert to a second cryptosystem for the transmission of 
the bulk of the message.
   
This is an artifice to reduce the amount of computation which would 
be necessary if RSA were employed exclusively.   
 
The drawback of such hybrid methods is that the security of the second 
cryptosystem may be of a lower order than RSA or may not have been 
subject to the rigorous examination over the extended period of time 
which is required to provide conviction of its ability to withstand 
attack by methods known but not divulged or methods discoverable at some 
future time. 
 
 
 
QS IN A NEW APPROACH PROVIDES HIGH SECURITY AT FASTER ENCRYPTION RATES:
 
QS has a completely different approach which greatly reduces computational 
burdens and consequentially enables very high encryption and decryption 
speeds to be obtained without jeopardizing security.
 
As an illustration, encryption and decryption at rates up to 
40 Kilobytes/sec are obtainable with software on a personal computer 
so that virtually no delay will be introduced by the encryption process
in respect of most computer-to-computer communications via line or radio 
links --- as might be required, for example, in commercial, banking or 
legal transactions.
 
The Inventors regularly employ key lengths of 1024 bits in their own 
communications.
 
Much higher rates are achievable if a separate processor is employed; 
for example by utilizing a plug-in expansion board which can be installed 
in any of the various types of computer which are in common use.
 
As a further illustration of the advanced performance of QS, encryption of 
live speech with QS has been successfully demonstrated over an ordinary 
telephone line achieving privacy in telephone conversations with what is
probably the highest degree of security possible and, incidentally, with 
what is probably the simplest equipment for such a purpose.
 
 
 
READERS OF SCI-CRYPT WILL BE INTERESTED IN THE TECHNICAL INFORMATION 
WHICH FOLLOWS:
 
The Public Key Cryptosystem devised by Rivest, Shamir and Adlemann and 
known as RSA employs exponentiation for encryption and decryption, thus:
 
                   y = x^e     and     x = y^d    (modulo m)
 
where x is the plaintext, e is the Public Key used for encryption (which 
is published), y is the ciphertext and d is the Private Key used for 
decryption (which is kept secret).
 
The modulus m = p*q  where p and q are two prime numbers different from 
each other.  The security of RSA is a consequence of the difficulty of 
factorizing m when the two primes are very large numbers  this is an 
intractable problem in number theory.
  
Other necessary conditions are that the Keys e and d are coprime to 
(p-1)*(q1) and that (d * e) mod ((p-1)*(q-1)) = 1
 
The security of RSA can be increased at will by increasing the size of 
the primes and therefore the size of the modulus m.  The penalty is that 
the computational effort necessary increases correspondingly and the 
speed of encryption and decryption is reduced.
 
 
  
QS OPERATES TO ACHIEVE HIGH SPEEDS FOR BOTH ENCRYPTION AND DECRYPTION 
WITHOUT LOSS OF SECURITY: 
 
The following description outlines the methods employed:
 
The Modulus and the Public Keys are published or are made known in any 
other manner considered appropriate.
 
To initiate a QS Cryptosystem transmission an Instantial Key is required 
and is preferably chosen at random.  It will become the Session Key and 
will be discarded at the end of the transmission.
 
The preliminary action is to transfer the Instantial Key from Sender to 
Receiver for which purpose RSA methods are used and the Public Key of 
the Receiver is employed.
 
The message to be transmitted is then divided into blocks.
 
 
THE TWO OPERATIONS OF QS:
  
Each block of the message in turn is transformed into a block of ciphertext 
by calculating the Exclusive-OR of that message block with a block of 
"cryption", the block of cryption itself having been calculated in two 
operations as follows:
 
The FIRST OPERATION calculates the Exclusive-OR of the Instantial Key with 
the preceding block of ciphertext -- with the assumption for the first 
block of cryption that the preceding block of ciphertext was zero.
 
The SECOND OPERATION raises the result of the first operation to a low 
power (for example, to a power chosen arbitrarily to be three) modulo the 
bulk modulus -- thus producing a block of cryption.
 
The bulk modulus is a further modulus chosen for the property that it's 
factorization is unknown to both receiver and enemy  -- it may, for 
example, be the modulus of the Sender.
 
Finally, a "hash" is formed from the Exclusive-OR of all the blocks of 
cryption (including the block of cryption constructed after the end of 
the message from the last block of ciphertext and the instantial key) and 
this hash is signed using RSA for that purpose.
 
The corresponding procedure for decryption involves constructing each 
block of cryption from each of the successive blocks of ciphertext and 
the Instantial key and calculating the Exclusive-OR of the cryption 
with the ciphertext to yield the plaintext.
 
Variants of the QS process are possible:  For example, the Instantial 
Key (IK) could be varied from block to block by using IK, IK^2, IK^3 
and so on for successive blocks.
 
 
SECURITY RELATIVE TO RSA:
 
The  security of the encryption function in relation to RSA is of 
particular interest and in this connection a number of interesting 
properties can readily be proven.
 
 
COMMENT 1.
 
The following theorem shows that an attack which can guarantee to decrypt 
any QS message that uses a given receiver's keys can (if a minor 
coprimality condition is fulfilled) also guarantee to break RSA that uses 
those same keys. 
 
 
THEOREM 1:
 
If there exists a small exponent J, an attack A, and a set of (public) 
keys Mr,Br with Br coprime to J, such that for all bulk moduli Mb,  
A can decrypt all QS ciphertexts constructed using the said  keys,  
 
Then A can decrypt any RSA message constructed using Mr,Br.
 
 
Proof:
 
Let H be an arbitrary block of an arbitrary such RSA  ciphertext. 
 
Consider H followed by a zero block to be a QS ciphertext formed using 
Mr, Br, Mr and J as recipient's modulus and public exponent and  as  bulk 
modulus and small exponent respectively  (and  an unknown  session   key).  
 
This message may be decrypted  using  A, yielding a single block of QS 
plaintext S with the property  that S=((K MOD Mr)^J) MOD Mr for some 
session key K such that H=(K^Br) MOD Mr.  
 
Note that K<Mr since K is an RSA plaintext block.  Hence we know 
(K^J) MOD Mr and we know (K^Br) MOD Mr,  and since J  and Br  are coprime  
we  can deduce  K  by  the  extended  Euclidean Algorithm.
 
We remark that a (weaker) attacker may only be able to  guarantee to  
decrypt QS messages given a fixed large number N of initial blocks  of 
plaintext, and might reasonably expect the two-block message  constructed  
in Theorem 1 to be too difficult.  It is therefore of interest that even 
the ability to guarantee to be able to extend all given long partially 
decrypted  messages implies the ability to decrypt small-exponent RSA  using
that bulk modulus, as will be seen in the following two theorems:
 
 
 
COMMENT 2.  
 
An attack may however only be able to guarantee to break a QS message 
given a sufficient length of ciphertext and corresponding  plaintext to 
start it off.  The following theorem shows that even an attack which
requires 
a given fixed amount  of plaintext to work on must be able to deduce the  
value of the instantial key if it can guarantee to complete the plaintext.
 
 
THEOREM 2:                  
 
Let H1,H2,...,Hm be a QS ciphertext (less its initial block) formed using  
Mb as bulk modulus and J as the  small exponent.   
 
Suppose  that T1,T2,...,Tm  is the corresponding plaintext, and is known 
to an attack A; moreover that this attack A  can  provide corresponding
plaintext  extension  Tm+1,Tm+2,... given  any ciphertext extension 
Hm+1,Hm+2,...  etc.  
 
Then A can deduce the session key K used in the message.
 
 
Proof:
 
This will be given for the case  J=3,  as it is readily generalisable 
for larger J, although computational requirements increase as J gets larger.
 
Consider three different two-block extensions of the ciphertext, and the 
corresponding plaintexts available from them using A. 
 
Let the first extension have Hm+1=0, Hm+2=0, the second have 
Hm+1=1, Hm+2=0, and the third have Hm+1=2, Hm+2=0.
  
Let Q0, Q1,and Q2 be the second block of the first, second, and third 
plaintext extensions respectively. 
 
Then Q0=(K^J) MOD Mb, Q1=((K+a)^J) MOD Mb, Q2=((K+b)^J) MOD Mb, where 
a may be either +1 or -1 and b may be either +2 or -2.  
 
Then since J=3, Q1=(K^3+3aK^2+3Ka^2+a^3) MOD Mb, and similarly for Q2.  
 
If temporarily we suppose a and b known, we may consider the three 
linearly-independent modular linear equations:
 
Q0=(R) MOD Mb
Q1=(R+3Sa+3Ta^2+a^3) MOD Mb
Q2=(R+3Sb+3Tb^2+b^3) MOD Mb
 
and solve them for R, S, and T. We then remark that if we had the 
correct values for a and b, and since J=3, 
 
R=(K^3) MOD Mb
S=(K^2) MOD Mb
T=K 
 
Since there are only four possible pairs of values for a and  b, we can 
simply solve all four sets of equations and see which give this 
relationship between R, S, and T. Hence we have found K.
 
 
 
COMMENT 3.
 
The following theorem shows that an attack such as that contemplated 
in Theorem 2 above, that will work for any set of receiver's keys, must 
be able to break RSA that uses the bulk modulus and the given small 
exponent as encryption exponent.
 
 
THEOREM 3:  
 
Let N be a fixed (maybe large) integer.  Let Mb be a given bulk modulus, 
and J a given small exponent. Suppose that an attack A can, for any 
QS ciphertext using this bulk modulus  and exponent, deduce the full 
decrypted message from the ciphertext, the  public keys, and the first 
N blocks of corresponding plaintext.  
 
Then A can read any RSA message that uses Mb and J as modulus and public 
exponent respectively.
 
 
Proof:
 
Let  H  be an arbitrary block of an arbitrary such  RSA  message. 
 
Then  consider the sequence of blocks  H,0,0,0,0,....  (continued for  
N  blocks) to be a QS ciphertext using  Mb,J,Mb,J  for the sender's 
modulus, sender's public exponent, bulk  modulus, and small exponent 
respectively (so that the session key is plaintext corresponding  to H).  
The plaintext of this QS-message is then given  by  H,H,H,H,...   
(continued for N  blocks).  
 
Then by the conditions given A can extend the plaintext given an 
arbitrary extension to the ciphertext, and hence by Theorem 2 can 
deduce the session key which is equal to the RSA plaintext corresponding 
to H.
 
 
 
QS IN PRACTICE.
 
 
 The QS Cryptosystem can be employed :-
 
--- for the protection and secure storage of data within a single 
computer
 
--- for the secure transmission of data of any type between one computer 
and another computer remotely situated
 
--- as a Public Key Cryptosystem which enables correspondence and data 
to be exchanged securely with other computers distantly located without 
the need for any previous contact between the computers involved or the 
exchange of Keys between them
 
--- for the protection and secure storage of correspondence and data 
within a network of computers operated by a company or financial 
institution which transacts its business at one or more than one location
 
--- for the secure exchange of business information between a company 
and its representatives travelling from place to place in various 
countries
 
--- for the interchange of information in a secure manner between 
computers or networks of computers which are operated by several 
different companies 
 
 
QS can be applied very simply in any of the situations listed above 
or in any similar situation in which the introduction of cryptography 
is desirable. 
 
Outlines of Case Studies of a few applications of QS are provided as 
examples of the improvements in security which can be obtained in 
particular cases.
 
 
 
CASE STUDY 1:
 
The scenario is a network of, say, 500 computers employed by one company 
but located in various buildings --- some buildings being close together 
on the same site but others being located in various towns where the 
business of the company is conducted. 
 
The computers are of various types and the wiring between them has grown
in complexity as it has been extended from time to time.  The computers 
in different buildings on the same site are interconnected with a LAN 
which is a ring main circulating data to all computers to which it is 
connected. 
 
The connections between buildings and different sites are provided 
variously by hard wire, optical fibre and by hired circuits from the 
public telecommunications company.  Some radio links are used and a 
number of portable computers are connected to a cellular network.
 
The company concerned has suddenly become aware of the inadequacy of its 
security arrangements because it has suspicions that its contract pricing 
has leaked to its competitors.  It wishes to introduce adequate security 
but is deterred by the high cost should a complete reorganisation and 
rewiring of its computer network be necessary.
 
A survey shows that there are so many places where surreptitious 
interception could take place that physical protection of the network is 
impractical.  The solution is cryptography.
 
 
THE PROPOSAL IS TO USE PUBLIC KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY INTERNALLY -- THAT IS 
WITHIN THE  COMPANY NETWORK -- IN A MANNER WHICH THE SPEED OF QS MAKES 
POSSIBLE.
 
The principal feature following the introduction of the QS plan, will be 
that no document which it is desired to protect will appear at any time 
or any any place in the network except in an encrypted form -- thus 
"plugging" instantly every one of the innumerable leakage points in the 
network.
 
A protected document will be available without delay to any authorized 
person within the company at his own desk or at any other place at which 
he desires to inspect it.  This will be possible because the speed of QS 
permits virtually instant decryption.
 
Every employee in the company authorized to see protected documents will 
be provided with his individual Key which he will use to obtain access.  
This provision will make it possible, if desired, to establish more than 
one level of access to sensitive material.
 
No distinction will be made in  handling or storing documents between 
protected documents which are encrypted and documents which do not require 
protection and therefore remain as plaintext. This will be an enormous 
simplification in comparison with any conventional system which requires 
elaborate arrangements to transport secret documents from place to 
place, to mark them for identification, store them securely and guard 
them for an indefinite period.
 
Special arrangements for safeguarding the Private Key of the company will 
be incorporated into the design and this Key will be available only to a 
few of the most senior people in the company acting in concert -- it will 
not appear anywhere within the computer network.
 
 
THIS EXTRACT FROM A CASE STUDY IS AN OUTLINE OF A FEW OF THE FEATURES OF 
A COMPUTER NETWORK OPERATING IN A COMMERCIAL ENVIRONMENT WHICH HAS BEEN 
PROTECTED BY A QS CRYPTOSYSTEM.
 
NOTEWORTHY IS THE FACT THAT THE HIGHEST POSSIBLE LEVEL OF SECURITY IS 
OBTAINABLE AT MINIMUM COST WITHOUT DEVASTATION OF THE FACILITIES WHICH 
EXISTED BEFORE THE CONVERSION.
 
 
 
CASE STUDY 2:
 
A company requires secure communication between its representative 
travelling overseas to negotiate a contract and the Managing Director of 
the company located in this country.
  
Both people will be provided with laptop computers which incorporate 
QS cryptography and will thereby be able to exchange information by typed 
messages or telephonically --- with security in both cases as the 
information will be encrypted and will be stored in encrypted form.
 
 
THE MANAGING DIRECTOR WILL HAVE THE OPTION OF TRANSFERRING THE ENCRYPTED 
INFORMATION  FROM HIS LAPTOP TO THE COMPANY'S COMPUTER NETWORK IF HE 
DESIRES TO DO SO. 
 
 
 
CASE STUDY 3:
 
The practice of a software development company is to load upgraded software 
into computers at remote sites by transmitting that software from a central 
location via data links over public service telephone lines.
 
A very high grade of performance is required from the data links and the 
possibility of interception and modification of the software during 
transmission must be eliminated.  It is also important that the origin 
of the software can be verified before it is accepted by the distant 
computer.
 
 
ALL THESE RIGOROUS REQUIREMENTS ARE EASILY SATISFIED BY THE USE OF QS 
CRYPTOGRAPHY WHICH IS ENGINEERED TO PROVIDE PRECISELY THE HIGH SECURITY 
AND OTHER FEATURES WHICH ARE NEEDED  IN THIS APPLICATION.
 
 
A case of particular importance arises if the data links are extended to 
the control of equipment which could place human life at risk if 
mis-operation occurred -- for example in an application to the control of 
transport systems such as railways.
 
 
 
 
PATENTS:
 
 
QS is protected by Patent Applications in the UK and Worldwide. 
 
The UK Patent Application GB 2 264 423 A provides a detailed explanation 
of QS principles. 
 
 
 
Inventors:
 
Co-Inventors:    
    
      George H. Foot,          Eur. Ing.,  C. Eng.,  FIEE, Snr. Mem. IEEE 
 
      Dr. Roger F. Sewell,     DM,  MA,  BCh,  MRCP
 
 
Address:         Waterfall,    
                 Uvedale  Road,   
                 Oxted,
                 Surrey,  RH8  0EW,  
                 England,  U.K. 
 
         
Telephone:       0883 712440      International:    +44  883  712440        
                       
                
E-Mail:          georgefoot@oxted.demon.co.uk 
 
 
               
The Inventors seek to contact individuals, organizations and companies 
interested in the QS cryptosystem who may wish to negotiate rights under 
the patent applications 
 
-- for the use of QS in circumstances in which security, authenticity 
and privacy is important for the conduct of business or the prevention 
of loss by fraud
 
-- for the introduction of QS facilities into the products which they 
manufacture or which are otherwise their concern.
 
 
It is relevant to remark that QS has been examined by mathematicians 
with great experience in the field of cryptography who have pronounced 
themselves satisfied with the security it offers.
 
 
The Inventors would welcome and greatly appreciate comments on the 
QS cryptosystem and on its security from anyone who may care to 
communicate with them.
 
Please direct comments and enquiries to George Foot   
 
at the E-Mail address:     georgefoot@oxted.demon.co.uk
 
or by letter mail to the above postal address.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


From msuinfo!agate!howland.reston.ans.net!pipex!uknet!pavo.csi.cam.ac.uk!leek!aph Tue Nov 16 21:56:27 1993
Newsgroups: sci.crypt
Path: msuinfo!agate!howland.reston.ans.net!pipex!uknet!pavo.csi.cam.ac.uk!leek!aph
From: aph@leek (Andrew Haley)
Subject: Re: QS - A New Cryptosystem
Message-ID: <1993Nov16.160443.23287@infodev.cam.ac.uk>
Sender: news@infodev.cam.ac.uk (USENET news)
Nntp-Posting-Host: leek.cam-orl.co.uk
Organization: U of Cambridge, England
X-Newsreader: TIN [version 1.1 PL8]
References: <931116144136@oxted.demon.co.uk>
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 1993 16:04:43 GMT
Lines: 12

George Foot (georgefoot@oxted.demon.co.uk) wrote:

> [ pages of stuff deleted to save bandwidth ]

This is no more than using modular exponentiation in CFB mode to
generate a stream cipher, and as such is prior art.  I'm not surprised
that a patent has been awarded, as it seems that these days one can
get a patent for anything, no matter how obvious.  How this would
stand up if challenged is another matter.

Andrew.


From msuinfo!caen!usenet.cis.ufl.edu!eng.ufl.edu!spool.mu.edu!howland.reston.ans.net!math.ohio-state.edu!sdd.hp.com!portal!hfinney Tue Nov 16 21:56:52 1993
Newsgroups: sci.crypt
Path: msuinfo!caen!usenet.cis.ufl.edu!eng.ufl.edu!spool.mu.edu!howland.reston.ans.net!math.ohio-state.edu!sdd.hp.com!portal!hfinney
From: hfinney@shell.portal.com (Hal Finney)
Subject: Re: QS - A New Cryptosystem
Message-ID: <CGLHG8.HHD@unix.portal.com>
Sender: news@unix.portal.com
Nntp-Posting-Host: jobe.shell.portal.com
Organization: Portal Communications Company
References: <931116144136@oxted.demon.co.uk>
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 1993 17:19:17 GMT
Lines: 33

A couple of comments.

In normal use of RSA, a random session key is generated and exchanged
via RSA.  This session key is then used as the key in a conventional
cryptosystem such as DES or IDEA which encrypts the actual message.

This QS system still generates a random session key and exchanges it
using RSA.  (This means that licenses will still be necessary from PKP
to use QS in the US, along with the additional license from the QS people.)
However, instead of becoming the key for a conventional cryptosystem,
it essentially seeds what is claimed to be a cryptographically strong
Unpredictable (pseudo) Random Number Generator (URNG).  This random
number sequence is then XOR'd with the message to encrypt it.

There are URNG's which are based on RSA algorithms.  For example, the
sequence X(i+1) = X(i)^3 modulo an RSA modulus provides such an URNG;
however, one can only use log modulus bits per iteration to keep it
unpredictable.  The QS RNG is defined by:

	X(i+1) = (K xor X(i) xor P(i))^3

where K is the random session key, X(i) is the random block which will
be xor'd with the plaintext, and P(i) is the ith block of plaintext.
The ith message block M(i) would then be:

	M(i) = X(i) xor P(i)

The idea of using a URNG for the "conventional" encryption in an RSA-based
cryptosystem seems reasonable (if obvious).  The claim here is that a full
(say) 512 or 1024 bits is achieved per iteration of the RNG rather than the
9 or 10 that would be available using existing methods.  If this holds up
it should be a useful technique.


