
		    WPcrak Password Retrieval Software
			 Version 3.1 (8-04-94)

			Version 3.1 is Only $99

	(The price of version 3.1 has been increased from earlier
versions due to the very great demand for this powerful program.) 


1    Copyright Notice: (C) Copyright by John E. Kuslich 1993,1994

		     All Rights Reserved

     This is copyrighted software.  You may not make or distribute 
copies of this software or any part of this software (including but
not limited to electronic copies) except as noted in the following
license agreement:

     License Agreement:

No copies of the registered version of WPcrak may be made except 
for archival purposes.  Only one person may use one copy of
WPcrak on one computer at any time. Network operation where several
users could operate a single registered copy of WPcrak at the
same time is prohibited unless a network licence has been purchased.

We do not guarantee that WPcrak will find all passwords for all
files. For example, if a file gets corrupted so that the printer
and font setup data is bogus, WPcrak may fail to find the 
password.  This  is unlikely, however unless the corruption 
extends over many bytes.  If you find a file which is not 
successfully cracked by WPcrak, send it to us with a properly 
constructed reference file and we will reward you by providing a 
free update to WPcrak as well as a copy of our one time pad 
unbreakable file encryption software as soon as it becomes 
available.

Do not send valuable data!!!!  We will not be responsible for
the unauthorized disclosure of whatever you send us!!!


2       Liability:

     The author assumes no liability whatsoever no matter what
happens under any conceivable circumstance no matter what period. 
If you don't like this condition, don't use the software. The
author accepts no liability for incidental or consequential
damages resulting from the use of WPcrak.  

2       Registration:
     
     Your purchase of WPcrak software registers the software.  This
software must be used in strict accordance with the license 
agreement.  

3       Program Capabilities:

     a)  Word Perfect (TM) Password protection:
--------------------------------------------------

     The Word Perfect (TM) program has an option allowing password 
protection for files.  This password protection supposedly
disallows reading or alteration (through the Word Perfect (TM)
program) of files by anyone not in possession of the "password"
used to protect the file.

     This protection happens to be very weak and is easily broken.
It relies on an encryption technique which can be successfully
attacked, especially if one is in possession of a
"non-password-protected" file of arbitrary contents.  

     Certain information associated with printer and base font is
known or can be known by simply creating a Word Perfect (TM) file
and setting up for the particular printer and base font.  This
information, together with knowledge of the encryption algorithm, 
(which is easily discovered by examining a known file encrypted 
with a given password) is used by the WPcrak program to discover 
the password used to "protect " the file.

     WPcrak quickly and easily discovers the password used to
protect Word Perfect (TM) files.


     b)  Legitimate Uses
----------------------------

     Nobody  likes the idea of snooping on private information
belonging to others, but there are a number of legitimate uses for
a program such as WPcrak.  These uses justify having a copy and
using it to overcome password difficulties.

	  1)  Bad Memory (yours) ---      Say you have a lot of
private files that you have been password protecting and, as time
goes by, you forget what passwords you used to protect certain
data.  Without WPcrak your out of luck!  Chances are, if you have
gone to all  the trouble of protecting unauthorized access to
files, the data they contain is extremely valuable to you.  Before
WPcrak you were lost!  With WPcrak , you can easily recover any of
those files! (Perhaps someone else can also and you should be
considering a stronger encryption algorithm for you private files)

	  2)  Malicious Behavior (theirs)  ---     One of your
trusted and key employees decides life in the
Bahamas (at your expense) would be a good idea.  He/she password
protects some really important business data and attempts to extort
money or a promotion in exchange for your business data.  Now you
have a choice of going out of business or writing some checks. With
WPcrak, you call the cops, document the extortion attempt, and
recover you data.  WPcrak puts you in control.


	  3) Shark Attack ---  You are a lawyer and through
discovery proceedings in a lawsuit,  the judge grants you access to
data files relevant to your case.  These files are in the
possession of your opponent.  Your worthy opponent dutifully gives
you the required data except that, all of a sudden, his/her memory
goes blanker than Ronald Regan's brain on Halcion. He/she cannot
remember a single solitary character of the passwords used to
protect the data.  You out of luck unless you have WPcrak!

	  4) Cops and Robbers ---   You are a law enforcement
officer investigating some evil doings by your local politician.
You subpoena his computer and files,  but to your chagrin, they are
password protected!  You are out of luck unless you have WPcrak!
With WPcrak, you look at the files which lead you to information
your target has no idea you know about.  You are a hero and the bad
guy goes to the slammer.

	  5) Illigitimus Non Carborundum* ---  You suspect your
teenage daughter of illicit activity with Andrew Dice Clay and she
writes password protected letters to him all the time.  Or your 10
year old son is writing password protected letters to Michael
Jackson.  What does a good parent do? I'll tell you what a good
parent does. He/she gets a copy of WPcrak and does some snooping.
Hopefully you don't discover that the little tyke is running a drug
ring on the side!


	  6) Adios WordPerfect --- You or your company decides to
change from WordPerfect ot a competing software product.  You find
that a lot of the old files are password protected and you want to 
convert them to the new format.  WPcrak will allow quick and easy 
access to protected files so they can be saved and used in the new
format.

	  7) Paradise Lost  --- You suspect your wife of cheating
and writing password protected love letters to Joe Wifestealer.
What do you do?  I'll tell you what you do. You dump the gal and
get a life.  (Forget WPcrak!)


4       Program Usage Instructions

WPcrak RUNS ONLY UNDER MICROSOFT WINDOWS!!! IF YOU DO NOT HAVE
WINDOWS INSTALLED ON YOUR COMPUTER YOU CANNOT RUN WPcrak!

A dos version is available:

Send your order (with check or money order) for $99 to:

		CRAK
		2901 E Greenway Pkwy
		P.O. Box 31844
		Phoenix, AZ. 85022-1844

Make check payable to "CRAK."

Or call 1 800 484 9628 x 7584 (Orders only Please),

On Compuserve Contact John E. Kuslich 72510,3115

On Internet e-mail johnk@indirect.com.

Or FAX 1 602 548 1993.






     a)      Installation (distribution disk)
--------------------------

	  1) Insert the distribution disk into the appropriate a:
or b: drive. 

	  3) Run Windows and select RUN under the FILE menu.

	  4) Type a:\setup or b:\setup as appropriate.  The setup
program will then use the standard Windows tools and install WPcrak
in its own program group.  If you would rather install WPcrak in
some other group, just drag the Icon to that group, drop it and
delete the WPcrak program group.

	  5) You may then delete all the *.xx_ files (compressed
files) from the working directory.  Don't delete any other files or
when you click on the WPcrak Icon, you will get nada. 

     b)     Installation (Zipped File version)

     Unzip the downloaded file to a directory called wpcrak. Copy
     vbrun300.dll to the \windows\system directory of your hard
     drive.  Select File\Run from the program manager command bar. 
     Type c:\wpcrak.exe.  You may select add an icon to any program
     group for wpcrak by following standard Windows procedures.

     c)      Using WPcrak
--------------------------

VERSION 3.1 OF WPcrak HAS A SECURITY FEATURE TO PREVENT
UNAUTHORIZED ACCES TO WPcrak.  THE PROGRAM WILL NOT FUNCTION
UNLESS THE PROPER SECURITY CODE IS ENTERED ON START-UP.  THIS 
FEATURE PROTECTS YOUR WORDPERFECT (TM) FILES FROM UNAUTHORIZED
ACCESS.  IF YOU LOOSE YOUR SECURITY CODE, WE WILL SUPPLY A NEW
COPY OF WPcrak WITH ANOTHER SECURITY CODE (EACH COPY OF WPcrak
HAS A UNIQUE SECURITY CODE) FOR THE FULL PRICE OF THE SOFTWARE.
THIS IS FOR YOUR PROTECTION AS WELL AS WELL AS FOR OUR PROFIT.

We recommend that the distribution disk for WPcrak be stored in
a safety deposit box, with a written copy of the security code.
Do not allow unauthorized access to WPcrak.

	  1) Starting Up ---  Double click on the program Icon and
wait a few seconds for the program to load.  

Type in the security code and A form will appear requesting the 
security code.  As soon as you type in the code, the form will 
dissolve and the program will start.

A dialog box will appear telling you to select the "FILE'  item 
from the menu bar in the upper left hand corner of the WPcrak 
window.  If this detailed level of direction is bothersome, just
select Suppress_Help_Messages from the FILE menu. This message will
mercifully cease to exist.  The flashing red arrow will continue to
suggest file selection as appropriate however.  These program
operational features were added after the WPcrak program was
subjected to the "Dumb User Test". We pride ourselves at having
some of the "Dumbest Users" available. These users complained that
the next operation was not obvious to the casual observer without
this prompt. 
 
	  2) Loading Files --- Remember...when you want to crack
open a password protected file,  you must have first loaded a
different non-password protected file according to the menu
selections.  If you get mixed up and load the wrong file first just
choose the 'NEW' or 'CLOSE' selections from the file menu and start
over.  The menu will only allow one type of file to be loaded at
one time so just do what you are told!

	  3) Non-Protected file ---  The non-protected file must
have been created with the same printer setup as your password-
protected file.  Usually, if the file to be cracked is one of your
own files, the number of possible choices is probably quite
limited.  After all how many printers does one man/woman own? -
usually. The question of base fonts is a little more problematic
but again, most people making password protected files for their 
own use don't go wild and use every font in the book. In almost all
circumstances, there are a very limited number of possibilities and
simple trial and error will eventually produce the desired result. 
This limitation tends to prevent abuse of this powerfull program.

	  Remember, you can use any text as long as the printer
setups correspond.  Whatever else the file contains is completely
irrelevant.  

	  4) Automatic Search ---  The automatic search feature is
selected by clicking on the 'START' command button located within
the 'AUTO SEARCH' area.  When AUTO search is selected,  the program
will assume the password length is one character and begin trying
to find the password.  After searching through 'ANALYSIS LENGTH'
number of characters, (default=200) the program will increment the
password length by one and repeat the search of the same number of
characters until passwords with lengths up to and including 25
characters have been tried.  The 'ANALYSIS LENGTH' parameter
controls the length of file header searched for passwords in bytes.

This parameter may be reduced to quicken the search process or
increased to avoid missing a password.  Let your own experience be
your guide in setting this parameter.  

	  You may stop the search at any time by clicking on the
'STOP' command button.

	  You may change the default setting of the 'PASSWORD
LENGTH' parameter if you have a registered copy of WPcrak. 
  
	  5)    The 'MANUAL SEARCH' feature of WPcrak allows the
user to change the starting value of the password length.  This
allows for faster searches if you know in advance that the password
is unlikely to be less than some value. 

	  6)    The grid window in the lower center of the screen
displays five rows of information in columns.  There is one column
for each byte field in the Word Perfect file header.  You may
scroll horizontally to see more of the header up to 'ANALYSIS
LENGTH' rows.  

	  The first row shows the Hex values of the password
protected file.  The second row show the plaintext file data 
(only valid after the password has been discovered).  The
third row shows a sequence used to encrypt the protected file.  
The derived 'KEY" or password in Hex is shown in the next row.  The
ASCII value of this 'KEY' is shown in the last row.  Some of the
bytes in the last row are corrupted by the particular encryption
algorithm Word Perfect used to "protect" the files.  WPcrak filters
out this trash and discovers the correct password. Scanning this
field of data may be helpfull if the password contains control
characters.  In this case, you will have to look up the keystroke
in the accompanying table.

	  7)    If the password contains non-printing control
characters such as cntl-C, you will see one of the Windows
character set representations for these characters in the password
text box.  To find out what these non-printing characters are you
must consult the accompanying ASCII table. Look up the character in
password box that appears under the password.

Happy password hunting!!!





The table below shows the ASCII character codes in decimal format and
the corresponding keystrokes.  The ^ character means simultaneous
Cntl and key combinations. 

	 0      ^@       32     [space]  64     @        96     `
	 1      ^A       33     !        65     A        97     a
	 2      ^B       34     "	 66	B	 98	b
	 3      ^C       35     #        67     C        99     c
	 4      ^D       36     $        68     D        100    d
	 5      ^E       37     %        69     E        101    e
	 6      ^F       38     &        70     F        102    f
	 7      ^G       39     '        71     G        103    g
	 8      ^H       40     (        72     H        104    h
	 9      ^I       41     )        73     I        105    i
	 10     ^J       42     *        74     J        106    j
	 11     ^K       43     +        75     K        107    k
	 12     ^L       44     ,        76     L        108    l

	 13     ^M       45     -        77     M        109    m
	 14     ^N       46     .        78     N        110    n
	 15     ^O       47     /        79     O        111    o
	 16     ^P       48     0        80     P        112    p
	 17     ^Q       49     1        81     Q        113    q
	 18     ^R       50     2        82     R        114    r
	 19     ^S       51     3        83     S        115    s
	 20     ^T       52     4        84     T        116    t
	 21     ^U       53     5        85     U        117    u
	 22     ^V       54     6        86     V        118    v
	 23     ^W       55     7        87     W        119    w

	 24     ^X       56     8        88     X        120    x
	 25     ^Y       57     9        89     Y        121    y
	 26     ^Z       58     :        90     Z        122    z
	 27     ^[       59     ;        91     [        123    {
	 28     ^\       60     <        92     \        124    |
	 29     ^]       61     =        93     ]        125    }
	 30     ^[space] 62     >        94     ^        126    ~
	 31     ^_       63     ?        95     _        127    ^bksp



* *     Values 8, 9, 10, and 13 convert to backspace, tab, linefeed, 
and carriage return characters, respectively. 

Please direct any questions or comments to "johnk@indirect.com" or
Compuserve 72510,3115. 
I will try my best to answer any of your questions concerning
WPcrak. 

If you do not have Internet access, write to:

		CRAK
		2901 E Greenway Pkwy
		P.O. Box 31844
		Phoenix, AZ. 85022-1844
       
or,

FAX your question to: 602-548-1993.


Copyright Notice: (C) Copyright by John E. Kuslich  1993  

Word Perfect is a trademark of Word Perfect Corporation.          

Compuserve is a trademark of Compuserve Corp.                   
				    

*Translation available on request. Thanks.                      

     This is copyrighted software.
by John E. Kuslich 1993,1994 All Rights Reserved
