
About These Books
=================

These books contain the source code and other tools that make up a
software package called Pretty Good Privacy, or PGP for Personal
Privacy, Version 5.5. The code is divided into two parts, the PGP
application clients, and the PGPsdk software developer's kit, the
portable library which they are based on.

PGP is a high security cryptographic software application for Unix(tm),
Windows(tm) and Macintosh(tm) platforms. Since its initial release by
Philip Zimmermann as freeware in 1991, PGP has become the worldwide
defacto standard for email encryption. PGP is based on public key
cryptography, and allows people to exchange files or messages with
privacy, authentication, and convenience.

Cryptography software involves trust - trust in the algorithms, trust
in the protocols, trust in the way that keys are managed, trust in the
integrity of the implementor. Somehow, PGP has become widely trusted by
PGP users. Part of the reason is that Phil, right from the beginning,
published the source code to PGP so that people can inspect it for "back
doors", themselves. The books you hold in your hand extend that tradition
of source code publication for peer review. We hope they will extend and
expand the trust of PGP by the user and developer communities.

These books provide a complete copy of the source code needed to build
the current release of PGP 5.5. In addition, they include most of the
extra packaging material and in stallation scripts used to build the
commercially distributed packages, since that portion is not completely
above suspiscion, either. The exceptions are due to their bulk: the
manuals, and some of the graphics, which are not crucial to the
software's basic functionality.

To ensure that the books can be clearly read, they are printed in a format
recommended by the book Tools for Publishing Source Code via OCR (ISBN
1-891064-02-9). In addition, each of the three sets of volumes has its own
file consisting of SHA hashes for each reconstructed source code file. The
files of assembled hashes have been digitally signed by Philip Zimmermann,
ultimately ensuring the authenticity of the contents of each set.


Fearless Leader
---------------
Philip Zimmermann 


Development
-----------
Derek Atkins
Bill Blanke
Jason Bobier
Lloyd Chambers
Mark Elrod
Hal Finney
Damon Gallaty
Chris Harman
Dave Heller
Paul Johnson
Colin Plumb
Will Price
Brett Thomas
Mark Weaver 


Documentation
-------------
Gail Haspert
Mike Iannamico

 
Management 
----------
Olivia Dillan
Mark McArdle
Will Price
Helena Winkle


Quality
-------
Jeff Harrell
Philip Nathan
D.J. Young


Source Code Books 
-----------------
Colin Plumb
Brett Thomas
Mark Weaver
Philip Zimmermann


Thanks also to the hundreds of volunteers who've worked on this
project since 1991.
