
                           THE ACA AND YOU

[ From "A Handbook for Members of The American Cryptogram Assocation" ]

  The American Cryptogram Association was organized originally to place
the "cryptogram" on an equivalent basis with chess, thus contributing
to the happiness of mankind.  It has grown to encompass many phases of
cryptography, using both pencils and paper and computers.

  During the 1920s, "Detective Fiction Weekly" had a feature on
cryptography by M. E. Ohaver.  Dr. C. B. Warner and some friends were
attracted by the technical aspects of this as a hobby, and joined
to form the American Cryptogram Assocation on September 1, 1929.

  Meanwhile, in Burton, Ohio, George Lamb ran the "Secret Corner" in
the local newspaper.  He was reading Ohaver's column, and was also a
member of the National Puzzler's League, from whom we have inherited
the idea of using noms-de-plume, or "noms", as a means of bringing
equality - or at least anonymity - to their cipher-solving.  Lamb
chose "DAMON-ODAD" as his nom, and became known as "DAMON".  He too
was concentrating on Aristocrats, and on finding the demand for his
column was increasing, he and Warner agreed to publish a magazine which
would be the official journal of the ACA.  It was to be named
"The Cryptogram".  The ACA now has nearly 1000 members all over the
world, and "The Cryptogram" has grown to a 32-page bimonthly journal,
with six major departments and a separate Computer Supplement.

  In 1933, "The Master Puzzler" was published, and contained the name
of Helen Fouche Gaines under the nom of PICCOLA.  Her major interests
were in ciphers - various systems of disguising text aside from the
Simple Substitution.  Her first article appeared in The Cryptogram in
December 1933, and was followed by the opening of the "Cipher Exchange"
in that magazine.  The following year, a foreign-language department
was started under the name "Xenocrypts".

  In 1936, interest having grown in ciphers and methods of breaking
them, it was suggested that the ACA should publish a text book.  The
contents would be taken from the "Round Robin" lessons that had been
a major method of spreading information and practice among members,
with additional material from foreign sources and hard-to-find books.
With help from many volunteers, "Elementary Cryptanalysis" appeared
for the first time in 1939, under the editorship of Helen Fouche Gaines.
The book was also dedicated to George Lamb, who died before it
appeared in print.  PICCOLA died soon after.  "Elcy" was the first book
of its kind to appear in English, and was reprinted by Dover in 1956
under the title "Cryptanalysis".  It remains a standard text to this
day.  The ACA has since published many other booklets on specialized
subjects, all produced by volunteers among our members.

  In 1982 a regular "Computer Column" was started.  In deference to
those who do not possess computers, fully developed programs are not
published in this column, but only hints and suggestions for
enciphering and deciphering.  In 1986, a "Computer Supplement" began
publication; it contains more information on computer activities.

  Cryptography has been more than merely an entertainment for the
enjoyment of ingenuity.  It engages the mind fully, and can provide
a healthy period of work for those unable to do much else.  George
Lamb was confined to a wheelchair, but the world of cryptography
opened its content as well as its friendships to him.  It can become
a harmless addiction, a passion, so captivating are the efforts
required in grappling with a problem.

  A member reminded us once that it's a nice hobby in that it can be
enjoyed with no more equipment that a pencil and paper, and little
expense beyond postage and a subscription to the ACA.

  The ACA is a non-profit organization with no limits on membership,
devoted to the dissemination of cryptographic knowledge.  Officers
receive no reward for service other than the joy of promoting
cryptography.

  Cryptographers are diversified in every way.  Hardly a trade or
profession has missed representation among us.  Age is not a factor;
we have had members under 10 and over 90.  Formal education seems
totally unrelated to the curious talent.  The use of noms brings a
degree of anonymity to the members; only cryptography counts.  We are
banded together in an organization which represents everyone with
these aims: to gain the most from a study of cryptograms, to form
worth-while friendships, and to pass on the knowledge we have been able
to add to the Art.

  Once a year members and friends, experts and novices, gather at a 
Convention.  Many meet for the first time, although they may be old
friends by mail.  New enthusiasm is generated for the hobby as mutual
help is given and experience is shared.

TO JOIN

Contact:

American Cryptogram Assocation
P.O. Box 198
Vernon Hills, Illinois  60061-0198
USA


READING LIST

Kahn, David, "The Codebreakers", Macmillian, New York, 1967

  A monumental - 1164 pages - history of codes and ciphers from
ancient Greece to the present day.  Good descriptions of the mechanics
of cryptanalysis, with emphasis on the people involved.  Also available
in paperback from Signet (abridged).


Gaines, Helen Fouche, "Cryptanalysis", Dover, New York, 1956

  Originally published before the war, this is the amateur cryptanalyst's
bible.  Clear, concise descriptions of many ciphers and how to attack them.


Sinkov, Abraham, "Elementary Cryptanalysis", The Mathematical Association
  of America, 1966

  This book contains a well-written description of several ciphers.  More 
limited range than Gaines, but the treatment is deeper, with extremely
good analysis of the mathematics involved.  The Third edition contains
some BASIC programs for computer analysis.


FOR COMPUTER USERS:

Foster, Caxton, "Cryptanalysis for Microcomputers", Hayden, New Jersey, 1982

  A very good introduction to computer use for encryption and decryption,
containing many BASIC programs, and also a good patternword list.


SPECIALTY PUBLISHER:

  The Aegean Park Press, PO Box 2837, Laguna Hills, California 92653, has
an extensive list of publications in the field of cryptanalysis.  Included
are reprints of famous works, and modern contributions.


OTHER JOURNALS:

  "Cryptologia:, a quarterly journal devoted to Cryptography, is published
at the Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, Terre Haute, Indiana 47803, USA.

(Reviews of other books (and also software) are regular features in both
"The Cryptogram" and "The Computer Supplement").


