                                                June 1, 1992

        Welcome to the second CPSR Cryptography and
Privacy Conference.  The purpose of this meeting is to
provide an opportunity for policy makers, industry
representatives,  researchers, and privacy experts to
discuss critical issues in cryptography policy.

        In 1989 CPSR called for open public hearings on
cryptography policy.  We testified before the House
Judiciary Subcommittee on National Security and said
that  "encryption is the most important technical
safeguard for ensuring the privacy and authenticity of
all messages that travel along computer networks."

        Since 1989 the growing importance of cryptography
has become clear.  The rapid development of new
communication services, the increasing significance of
the communications infrastructure, and the clear
desirability of strong protection for electronic
messages have all made clear the need for a policy that
promotes communication privacy and security.  However,
this goal may at times conflict with the interests of
those agencies involved in communications surveillance.

        Last year the Federal Bureau of Investigation
proposed legislation that would have required
communication carriers to provide a "plaintext" version
of encrypted messages.  This year the FBI put forward a
controversial plan for a licensing scheme, administered
by the Federal Communication Communication, to set
technical standards for telephone equipment so as to
facilitate wire surveillance.  This plan was later
withdrawn, but a new proposal would require the
development of a "remote surveillance" capability.

        Meanwhile, computer researchers in the United
States face the risk of criminal sanctions if they
attempt to send encryption  technology to foreign
countries.  The export control regime, which was put in
place during the Cold War era, has now come under
intense scrutiny as  firms in the United States and
computer scientists increasingly ask whose interests
are served by these restrictions on the exchange of
scientific information.

        Recognizing the growing importance of cryptography
for computer users across the country, the Computer
System Security and Privacy Advisory Board recently
called for a national review of cryptography policy.
Congressman Jack Brooks has also just held hearings
that considered the new role of cryptography in the
information economy.

        We hope that this meeting will further that
process. While we endorse the Security and Privacy
Advisory Board's recommendation, we believe that any
comprehensive review of cryptography policy will
require the participation of computer researchers,
privacy experts, and public interest representatives.
The implications of cryptography policy are so far-
reaching that a discussion between industry and
government officials is simply not sufficient.

        Throughout these developments it has remained
CPSR's position that our national interest  will best
be served by policies that protect privacy and promote
the unrestricted exchange of scientific and technical
information.  Even where it is possible to impose
short-term restrictions on new technologies, the long-
term costs are likely to be substantial.

        We  appreciate the willingness of agency officials
and Members of Congress and their staff to participate
in these discussions.  These meetings, combined with
the annual conference on Computers, Freedom and
Privacy, have provided the opportunity for a more
complete public debate on the future of cryptography
policy.

        We also wish to express our appreciation to those
organizations and individuals that support the CPSR
Civil Liberties Program, particularly the Electronic
Frontier Foundation, and the J. Roderick MacArthur
Foundation, the Deer Creek Foundation, the Stern Family
Fund, RSA Data Security, the Information Technology
Association of America, and several anonymous donors.
The United States Privacy Council  and the ACM
Committee on Computers and Public Policy expressed
their support for this event.

        Dave Banisar, CPSR's Policy Analyst, organized
both the first Cryptography and Privacy Conference and
this meeting as well.  His work to promote the public
interest has been substantial.  David Sobel, CPSR's
Legal Counsel, has successfully "thrown a little
sunlight" on the cryptography debate through litigation
under the Freedom of Information Act.  His efforts led
to the release of NSD-42, the revised National Security
Directive on computer security policy, and helped to
document the role of the National Security Agency in
the development of the Digital Signature Standard.

        CPSR is a national membership organization with
offices in Palo Alto, California, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, and Washington, DC.   For  membership
information contact the CPSR National Office, P.O. Box
717, Palo Alto, CA  94302.  The electronic mail address
is cpsr@csli.stanford.edu.

