			INSTALLING THE PROGRAM

CRYPT201.EXE is a self-extracting zip file.  To install CRYPT, version 2,
execute CRYPT201.EXE with the subdirectory switch -d.  This will install the
main program in subdirectory \CRYPT (from your current directory), and a
collection of sample cryptograms in subdirectory \GRAMS (from your current
directory).

The simplest scheme is to execute CRYPT201.EXE from your root directory on your
C drive.  For example:

C:>crypt201 -d

This will install the program in directory \CRYPT, creating the directory if
necessary; and the cryptograms in directory \GRAMS.



			PRINTING THE HANDBOOK

After self-extraction, you will find CRYPT2.DOC in the \CRYPT directory.  This
is a formatted document ready for printing on an Epson compatible dot matrix
printer.  If you have this kind of printer, be sure to set it to IBM emulation
mode (see your printer manual -- this usually involves setting some switches on
the printer).  Then print it as follows

C:>copy crypt2.doc lpt1

It does not print correctly on a laser printer because it has Epson control
codes imbedded in it.

For laser printers, use crypt2.asc.  It will at least print on a laser, but
you may want to import it to your word processor and massage it first.

				PACKAGE

Directory CRYPT contains:

	CRYPT.EXE	CRYPT version 2.  Solving environment for some classic
			puzzle ciphers commonly used by the American Cryptogram
			Association.  These are:
			1.  Aristocrat (simple substitutions with word
			    divisions).
			2.  Rail fence
			3.  Route transpositions
			4.  Complete columnar transposition
			5.  Nihilist transposition
			6.  Bifids -- 5x5, 6x6, and Twins.

	ENGLISH.DCT	Pattern dictionary of English in ASCII
	ENGLISH.NDX	Binary index to ENGLISH.DCT
	ENGLISH.DAT	English statistical data
	BLDINDEX.EXE	Program to rebuild ENGLISH.NDX if the dictionary is
			changed.
	CRYPT001.HLP - CRYPT006.HLP  On line help screens.

	CRYPT2.DOC	CRYPT Handbook.  Formatted for dot matrix printer.
	CRYPTASC.DOC	CRYPT Handbook in plain ASCII for laser printers.

Directory GRAMS contains:

	Numerous cryptograms in CRYPT's internal format.
		Aristocrats = yyiann   yy = year; i = The Cryptogram issue;
				       A = Aristocrat; NN = number.
		Bifids = .bif extension
		Nihilist transpositions = .nt extension
		Routes = .rt extension
		Complete columnars = cct
		Rail fences = rf

CRYPTSRC.ZIP

Finally, cryptsrc.zip contains all source code for crypt.  File extension str
are include files, mostly MASM structures for mapping control blocks. fanout is
embedded repeatedly where keyboard input must be parsed. whereis lists modules
with their entry points.  new is the runtime file for the link editor.	There
are no make files, you just link with new as the list of object modules.

Put cryptsrc.zip in a directory of your choice and unzip it. See file notes for
link editor instructions.

For convenience in debugging, all source is assembled with /A option, which
forces the assembler to emit the segments in alphabetical order (for crypt,
code segment first, data segment second).  The result after linking is all code
segments preceed all data segments.

While the order of code and data segments is for convenience only, the last
segment, zzz, is the stack and must end up last in the load module.  This is
crucial.  Crypt uses SS:SP to determine the beginning of free memory, so the
stack must be linked last.  Do whatever you have to to 6.0 Link to get this.
It does not appear to be a problem, but if it is, punt.

In cryptsrc.zip is ENGLISH.DAT.  This is a collection of English language
statistical data, based a couple of times removed on the Brown Corpus.	That
is, it is pretty authoritative.  This file is an ASCII file.  You may find it
useful.  CRYPT uses some of it.  The intent is to provide language.DAT files
for various languages that can be specified at run time to facilitate solving
ciphers in various languages.

John K. Taber
505 Indian Creek Dr.
Trophy Club, TX 76262
(817) 430-8173
jktaber@netcom.com
