From owner-aca-l@VM1.NODAK.EDU Thu May 19 10:24:45 1994
Received: from VM1.NoDak.EDU by scss3.cl.msu.edu (4.1/4.7)  id AA00283; Thu, 19 May 94 10:24:40 EDT
Received: from VM1.NODAK.EDU by VM1.NoDak.EDU (IBM VM SMTP V2R2)
   with BSMTP id 9737; Thu, 19 May 94 08:52:27 CDT
Received: from VM1.NODAK.EDU (NJE origin LISTSERV@NDSUVM1) by VM1.NODAK.EDU (LMail V1.2a/1.8a) with BSMTP id 1701; Thu, 19 May 1994 08:51:37 -0500
Date:         Thu, 19 May 1994 08:36:14 -0500
Reply-To: ACA-L <ACA-L@VM1.NoDak.EDU>
Sender: ACA-L <ACA-L@VM1.NoDak.EDU>
From: "John K. Taber" <jktaber@netcom.com>
Subject:      Sir Hinsley's Cambridge Speech
Comments: To: ACA Mail List <ACA-L@VM1.NoDak.EDU>
To: Multiple recipients of list ACA-L <ACA-L@VM1.NoDak.EDU>
Status: OR

I came across this while "surfing" the internet.  I thought Hinsley's
speech would be of interest to the Krewe.  Should we not arrange to
have it published in The Cryptogram?  Or maybe Cryptologia would be
interested?  Or has it already been published?

SY S. ABEND

-------------------------------------------------------------
>From klockstone@cix.compulink.co.uk Thu May 19 05:41:30 1994
Return-Path: <klockstone@cix.compulink.co.uk>
Received: from eros.britain.eu.net by mail.netcom.com (8.6.8.1/Netcom)
        id FAA16503; Thu, 19 May 1994 05:41:20 -0700
Received: from compulink.co.uk by eros.britain.eu.net with UUCP
          id <sg.16152-0@eros.britain.eu.net>; Thu, 19 May 1994 13:39:45 +0100
Received: from smtpsrvr by cix.compulink.co.uk id aa03691; 19 May 94 12:27 GMT
Received: by gonzales.compulink.co.uk. (5.65/25-eef) id AA09725;
          Thu, 19 May 94 13:27:29 +0100
Date: Thu, 19 May 94 13:27 BST-1
From: Keith Lockstone <klockstone@cix.compulink.co.uk>
Subject: Re: History of Enigma after WW II
To: jktaber@netcom.com
Reply-To: klockstone@cix.compulink.co.uk
Message-Id: <memo.155942@cix.compulink.co.uk>
In-Reply-To: <memo.151428@cix.compulink.co.uk>
Status: RO


           University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory

                        Security Seminar


Speaker:   Sir Harry Hinsley

Date:      Tuesday 19th October 1993

Title:     The Influence of ULTRA in the Second World War


Ross Anderson:  It is a great pleasure to introduce today's
speaker, Sir Harry Hinsley, who actually worked at Bletchley from
1939 to 1946 and then came back to Cambridge and became Professor
of the History of International Relations and Master of St John's
College.  He is also the official historian of British
Intelligence in World War II, and he is going to talk to us today
about Ultra.


Sir Harry:  As you have heard I've been asked to talk about Ultra
and I shall say something about both sides of it, namely about
the cryptanalysis and then on the other hand about the use of the
product - of course Ultra was the name given to the product.

And I ought to begin by warning you, therefore, that I am not
myself a mathematical or technical expert.  I was privileged to
be an assistant to the mathematicians led by Max Newman and Alan
Turing, but I have never myself learned to master or even to
approach mastering their art.

Ultra, of course, was the product of ciphers.  It was used only
for the product of the metering of the more important ciphers,
and from the spring of 1941 at Bletchley we broke most ciphers to
an unprecedented extent and with an unprecedented lack of delay.
And there were two reasons for that success.

First of all, alone among the governments of those years, the
British Government as early as the 1920's concentrated all its
cryptanalytical effort in one place which it called the
Government Code and Cipher School.  And at Bletchley secondly,
the staff rose from about 120 in 1939 to about 7,000 at the
beginning of 1944.

Of course that staff was not entirely cryptanalytical, it
consisted also of an immense amount of staff used, for example,
for signalling the products to commands in the rest of England or
abroad.  And so it wasn't entirely cryptanalytical staff - it was
a very mixed staff compared with pre-war.

In addition, those men and women, recruited mainly from
universities, developed methods and machinery of a sophistication
hitherto undreamt of, including as you all know the first
operational electronic computer which was called Colossus.

Without those advances, at least the most difficult of the
ciphers, which were (although I will make some qualifying remark
about this in a minute) those based on the German Enigma and
those still more complex systems which Germany introduced for
ciphering non-morse transmissions, would have been for all
practical purposes invulnerable.

Now the value of the resulting Ultra was all the greater because
the enemy states - Germany, Italy and Japan - remained unaware of
the British successes.

The main reason for that was that they didn't allow for that
sophistication of method and machinery which the British brought
to the attack on their ciphers.  They didn't allow for that when
they constructed their ciphers.

Nothing very surprising in that.  As I have said, the methods and
machinery developed were of a sophistication hitherto unthought
of.

But it still remains necessary to say that, despite that
sophistication, the German belief that the ciphers would remain
invulnerable was almost right, almost correct.

The ciphers nearly escaped effective exploitation.

In the case of the Enigma (which was an electro-mechanical
machine) the first solutions were made by hand by mathematicians
relying on German operators' errors.  The German airforce was
always more untidy in its signalling than the other users of the
Enigma.

And for that purpose (although you will understand it better than
I do) they used perforated sheets and exploited these mistakes
made by German operators.

For other keys than the airforce, especially those of the army
and the navy, and especially for the regular and speedy solution
of those keys, it was necessary to develop an effective answering
cryptanalytical machine.

That was the key in the end to the prompt decrypting of the
machine cyphers.

It was a machine called The Bombe - a name originally given to it
by the Poles who invented an early prototype in the 1930's.  The
Bombe developed in Bletchley by Turing and Welshman and Babbage -
all luminaries of the Cambridge scene - was helped a little by
the Polish machine, but it was infinitely more powerful, about
fifteen times more powerful than the Polish machine.  And it was
because of the greater difficulties of dealing with the Enigma
that it had to be that powerful.

But it wasn't enough to have that machinery developed.  Except in
the case of the airforce keys, we had to capture them before the
machinery - even this Bombe machinery - could break into them.

And that is where people like myself who were non-mathematical
came into the story.  It was because I was in close touch with
Turing, for example, that I was fully aware of what he had to
have before the machine which he had developed could exercise its
powers.

And I was able to arrange - with other people of course,
including the navy - how to capture that.  I stress that because,
both in the case of the navy and of the army, and at dates which
are later than we realise (I will give you the dates later), we
needed in addition to this superb mathematics, which was assisted
of course by superb Post Office engineering, we needed also these
side assets - essentially captured material.

That was the Enigma.  Now with the non-morse machine which we
called Fish, the first successes were again obtained by hand
methods.  And those hand methods by mathematicians again
exploited German operators' errors.  In fact, the actual
understanding of the machine theoretically (in other words as
opposed to breaking it every day), the actual understanding of
how it worked was obtained because the Germans went through a
long series of experiments with it on the air before they brought
it into operational use.

And it was these experimental transmissions which primarily were
the errors which gave the entree.

But it was obvious that any regular or at all reasonably speedy
decryption would be impossible if again machine methods were not
developed.  In particular that they would be impossible without
machines because the different Fish ciphers proliferated, just
like the different Enigma keys proliferated, and you were dealing
with a lot of ciphers concurrently.

And so in this case, as you know, the machine was developed which
came to be called Colossus.

It was of course a much more complex - it wasn't a mere
electronic electro-mechanical thing - it was the first computer.
It had to be like that in proportion to the fact that the Fish
was far more complex than the Enigma.

Now it will be clear from what I have said that the problem
wasn't merely to master the machines.  The Germans recognised
when they were constructing (in their view) an invulnerable set
of machines, that of course in wartime they would be open to
capture and therefore locally and temporarily they will be read.

But they also felt that the mere local (by which I mean reading
one key instead of another key) and temporary reading (in other
words that would complete your fundamental knowledge of the
machine) wouldn't help you to read it regularly and daily.  And
they were right, without this machinery that would have been
impossible.

And in particular it would be impossible because each of the
Enigma and the Fish were used by the Germans as the basis not
merely for one cipher each, not merely one Enigma and one Fish,
but as the basis for a wide range of different ciphers, each
cipher having its different key.

At one time the Germans were operating concurrently about fifty
Enigmas, some in the army, some in the airforce, some in the
navy, some in the railways, some in the secret service.  And so
you were faced not merely with understanding the machine and with
breaking a key regularly, but with breaking fifty sometimes
regularly at once, or as many of them as you could without delay.

And Fish similarly rose from just one link, one cipher, one key
to about 22 cipher links, all quite separate except they were
using the same machine.  And remember that each of them - the
Enigma daily and the Fish at varying interludes, usually every
few days - changed the keys.

So you are on constant alert - every day you had to start again
at midnight, and you had to start on perhaps 30 Enigmas or 5
Fishes and so you could see the mere load put it beyond any
manual solution.

That was one reason, that in spite of their confidence which was
not far from being fully justified, that was one reason why the
German confidence was proved to be unfounded.  The other was
(perhaps it is no less important) the fact that steps were taken
to avoid arousing enemy suspicion.

The British imposed strict secrecy of course on the Ultra
production process.  Strict regulations about its distribution -
who should be indoctrinated - strict regulations against
carelessness by users when using it.

Those regulations were pretty effective.  There were from time to
time cases in the war where the Germans did sufficiently suspect
to have an enquiry.  There were cases when the Italians suspected
and advised the Germans to have an enquiry.

I ought to say that everything I have been saying about the
complex nature of the attack on the ciphers hardly applied to the
Italian ciphers - and this is where I am going to bring my
ironical remark in about ciphers which will interest you people
as machinery experts.

The Italians only ran one machine and it was a baby really
compared with the Enigma.  It was a machine built by a firm
called Hagelin (we called it C-38).  The American armed forces
used it occasionally, but it was easily broken.  We broke it.  It
didn't come into use until the beginning of '41 and we broke it
by June '41.

It was a very valuable cipher for shipping in relation to North
African operations but it wasn't a cryptanalytical problem of the
kind I have been describing in the case of the German ciphers.

Ironically the Italians, except for that one cipher and also for
one they used for their diplomats, didn't use machines.  They
used book ciphers, and ironically we couldn't read the Italian
book ciphers for the army, the navy and the airforce after they
brought new ones in between June and November 1940 preparatory to
or as a consequence of their own entry into the war.

Book ciphers proved to be invulnerable when the machinery proved
not to be invulnerable!

And as I say the Italians occasionally, who rather looked down on
machine ciphers, warned the Germans that they thought that there
was evidence that the way the allies behaved suggested that maybe
they were reading the German ciphers.  And the Germans said
'Pooh, pooh, we are alright!'  Apart from occasional suspicions,
those precautions I described, as used by the Allies, worked.

They were wholly justifiable ones.  Any confirmation reaching the
Germans that this whiff of suspicion that this system that they
had constructed wasn't safe, would have led to not easy but not
impossible steps to render it safe.

But of course the precautions complicated the task of
establishing the value that Ultra had in the war.

Contemporary reports and the memoirs and histories that have been
published before the records about Ultra became available, of
course allow for, incorporate, the contribution Ultra made to
decisions and the course of events, but they don't acknowledge
it.  Because either the writers of the reports and the memoirs
didn't know about it, or they were not able to mention it.

So that historians now have to identify that contribution from
the written records about the war and it is a straightforward job
to do that now that Ultra is available.  You can see - we know
what Ultra went to what commands, we know what time it arrived,
we know what other intelligence they had at the time the Ultra
arrived, we know what decisions and orders followed from its
arrival, and frequently we have discussions on record about what
they thought about what they ought to do about it before they
reached their decisions.

It is not enough to establish accurately the availability of the
Ultra and to reach reasonable conclusions about its influence on
British and American assessments and decisions.  You have also
got to consider the consequences of those assessments and
decisions on the war.

Let me give an example of the distinction.  Once you have
identified the Ultra (which you now can from the decrypts in the
Public Record Office) you can see pretty clearly (if you have
also got the record of the war) that Ultra was the main reason
why the British were able to reduce the depredations of the U-
Boats in the Atlantic in the second half of 1941.

But what was the value of that effect in the North Atlantic in
that second half of 1941 on the course of the war?  What was the
consequence of that use of Ultra on the course of the war?  And
those effects too are already incorporated into the record, which
shows that the U-Boats were defeated in the North Atlantic in the
second half of 1941.

Of course in order to assess the true significance of Ultra we
have got to assume that it didn't exist in the North Atlantic at
that time.  We have got to strip it out of the record in order to
get its true significance into focus.

This is what historians call counter-factual history.  To
calculate something assuming that some factors in it didn't
exist.  And I am sure it is a process well known to
mathematicians and other people like yourselves.

But it is still the case that there is a great deal of danger in
using counter-factual history unless you use it very carefully.
For example it is very common among historians to use counter-
factual history either from a desire to shock or because the user
in question hasn't got any judgement.  And you have therefore got
to use it in relation to the possibilities that were practically
available in the circumstances that you are considering.

There is no danger whatever in reconstructing the course of the
war on the assumption that Ultra hadn't existed.

As I have said the story of its acquisition is of near legendary,
even science fiction proportions, because it might so easily not
have taken place.  You are not making a huge assumption when you
start playing with the record of the war on the basis that it
hadn't been solved, it hadn't been obtained.

It was by no means fortuitous or miraculous.  It was the
consequence of forces deliberately brought together to solve it.
But it was far from being inevitable that the forces would
succeed.  The proposition that we might have had to fight the war
without Ultra is a reasonable and necessary element in the
assessment of its true significance.

On the other hand if you apply counter-factual history and use
this proposition that Ultra might not have existed, you are
undertaking a pretty bold enterprise in hypothesis and
speculation and you must control that exercise by a constant
reference to the straightforward facts about what Ultra actually
did do.

If you apply that check, then I think we can draw two pretty
sound conclusions.  First of all, though we did obtain it in such
amounts, amounts rising to 2,000 of those Italian Hagelin
decrypts a day at the peak of the Mediterranean War and to 30,000
a month rising to 90,000 a month of Enigma and Fish decrypts
combined - that is a very big number of decrypts.  It is still
the case that those volumes and the speed with which they were
got out were not fully established until the second half of 1941.

Up 'till June '41 the successes were confined to decrypts of the
German airforce Enigma and some of the Italian book ciphers which
were quite readable before Italy came into the war and for a
month or two afterwards.

Those helped to produce isolated allied successes like the Battle
of Matapan when we defeated the Italian fleet, and wouldn't have
done so but for a few Enigma and Italian signals which gave
enough warning to the British Alexandria fleet.

The distances in the Mediterranean are such that unless you have
got some notice you can't cover the thousand miles or the seven
hundred and fifty miles.

So Matapan was one success.  The sinking of the Bismark was
another.  Again I am speaking of the period before June '41.  She
was sunk in May '41 just before the turn.  The defeat of the
Italians in East Africa and in North Africa.  Those were Allied
successes, but they were slightly isolated successes.

Again in the same period Ultra did something to mitigate British
disasters.  It greatly assisted the British forces that were sent
to Greece, to retreat without serious loss when it become obvious
that they couldn't hold a line against the scale of the German
invasion.

It gave us - here was another disaster - all the information
required to destroy the German attack on Crete.  We didn't
destroy the attack but we made it an extremely damaging exercise
for the Germans, which was done because the Ultra signals were so
complete.

Some people think we should have prevented or destroyed the
invasion - an air landing invasion.  In fact Bletchley Park felt
very strongly for the first time in the war that its product had
not been used properly in the case of the Crete invasion.  I
think possibly that we were wrong now that we can see the
evidence in more detail, but at least it helped to make it a
disastrous operation for the Germans even though they actually
got Crete as a consequence.

And so in all that story you can see that the British survived
the war with little benefit from Intelligence until the Germans
invaded Soviet Russia.  And since Soviet Russia survived the
German invasion, and that invasion was followed by the entry of
the United States in December '41, we can safely conclude that
Germany was going to be defeated in the long run, even if the
enormous expansion of Ultra from the summer of 1941 had not from
that date given the Allies this massive superiority in
Intelligence which they retained until the end of the war.

They were hardly ever rivalled by Axis success in reading our
ciphers.  There were two major exceptions to the lack of success
by the Axis against Allied ciphers.  One was that they did have
some success in reading a British naval cipher which was for a
longish time also shared with the American navy in relation to
convoy escorting.

They were successful in reading that for a long period from 1940
to the end of '42.  And the other was that they didn't exactly
capture but they managed to extract of copy of the cipher that
was being used by the American Military Attache in Cairo for a
period when Rommel was at his most dangerous.  And from that too
the Germans obtained some great advantage.

But generally speaking, except possibly in relation to the convoy
cipher, there was never any great cryptanalytical rivalry.  The
Germans were completely outclassed in terms of Ultra.  The
Italians also made very little progress against any important
allied cipher.

In June 1941 however, (we survived 'till then with very little
value from the Ultra), the end of the war still four years away.
And that is such a length of time that we might be tempted to
jump to the other conclusion and say that far from producing by
itself on its own the defeat of the Axis, it made only a marginal
contribution to it.

Here we are, we start getting this Ultra coming onto stream in
June '41 as opposed to the slight trickle before that date, and
yet you have still got four years of war.  How can it have made
much difference?

But that second conclusion can I think be as firmly dismissed as
the one I have been discussing about how Ultra didn't really win
the war.

The second real conclusion that stands out is that Ultra was
decisive in shortening the war from the time, beginning in the
summer of 1941, the cryptanalytical successes were extended from
the German airforce Enigma keys to the Enigmas used by the navy
and the army and the secret service, to the non-morse ciphers of
the German High Command which came on stream in mid 1941, and to
a new Italian machine cipher, the one I have mentioned which also
was brought into force beginning of '41 and broken in the summer
of '41.  And to the ciphers of the Italian and German and
especially Japanese Embassies.

The Japanese Embassies in Europe were in the second half of the
war to prove of immense Intelligence value because they were
repeating back to Tokyo their versions of German assessments and
their knowledge of German intentions.  They were almost as
valuable on some subjects (like for example the Normandy
Landings) as were the direct Ultra from the German horse's mouth.

>From the moment we began that expansion you can see that the
influence is continuous.  I have spoken of the amount of Ultra
there was.  The lack of delay, the fact that they were obtained
with very little delay was equally important.  After all, one of
the crucial characteristics of Intelligence is that to be useful
it must be quick.

In the case of the Enigmas we didn't exactly reach a position in
which the new keys, having come into force at midnight, were
broken by breakfast, but of, shall we say, twenty, twenty five
Enigmas running concurrently (the number varied according to
different stages of the war), we would be reading twenty to
twenty five at most times.  Of that twenty to twenty five the
ones to which highest priority was given on the limited number of
Bombes available would be out by breakfast.  Which meant that the
whole of the rest of that 24 hours' signals from the moment you
broke the key for the day, the setting for the day, would be read
instantaneously, as soon as the message was intercepted it would
be decrypted.

Fish was a bit slower.  It didn't change daily like the Enigma.
It varied, on different links it changed with different
frequency.  The average was that it changed about once every five
or six days - the setting of the keys changed every five or six
days.

Again the number we read varied from time to time but from the
end of '42 when Fish on the German side got going strongly, we
were generally reading four or five Fish links at any one time.

Generally we were reading them about seven, six, five days late -
after their transmission.  That didn't matter with Fish (at least
it didn't matter so much as it would have done with Enigma)
because, whereas the Enigma like that Italian machine was used
for what you might call operational purposes below army level for
something that was happening tomorrow or happening today, Fish
was reserved for communications between the highest commands of
the German Armed Forces.  Between Berlin and the army groups or
the armies.  And then never lower than armies.  It was a system
that increasingly replaced the landline transmissions between
Berlin and Kesselring in Rome and Von Rundstedt who was commander
in the west in Paris by 1943.

They were on landlines normally but gradually with Fish being
perfected as they thought and with landlines being damaged by
bombing they put more onto the air.

So Fish was carrying Intelligence of a character that didn't
really depend for its value on immediacy.  It would carry long
term estimates, or it would carry prolonged discussions between
German Headquarters on the Russian Front or in Italy and Berlin
about what was the best thing to do next.  So you didn't have the
immediacy requirement there as you did with the Enigma.

Speaking on the whole then we can see the fact that we were
getting Ultra in the amounts I spoke of and with the speed that I
emphasised as being a very important characteristic of valuable
Intelligence.  It was no use having Enigma a week late, and it
wouldn't be much use having Fish more than a month late.

If you had that amount of decrypts with that small amount of
delay, it would, I think, on the face of it, be surprising if
Ultra hadn't contributed to the very considerable shortening of
the war, given the fact that on the other side the enemy is blind
and his Intelligence is increasingly deteriorating because of the
Allied possession of the superiority in Intelligence.

I will give you an example of that.  We read all the Enigma
signals of the German Abwehr which meant that we captured every
spy that arrived in the United Kingdom by having advance
knowledge of his arrival.  Which meant that we could turn such as
we needed and use them to send messages we wanted the Abwehr to
receive, and monitor the reception and the reaction of the
Abwehr.  All that signal Intelligence underlay the effective use
of what was called the Doublecross Operation for the purposes
both of stopping German reception of Intelligence (other than
false Intelligence) and also of creating deception by sending
them false Intelligence.

So given that they were so blind and we were getting this
increasing amount with less and less delay, it would be
surprising if it hadn't, from the middle of '41, contributed
pretty appreciably to the difficulties of the enemy and to the
accurate appreciations of the Allies.

Now the question remains how much did it shorten the war, leaving
aside the contribution made to the campaigns in the Far East on
which the necessary work hasn't been done yet.  My own conclusion
is that it shortened the war by not less that two years and
probably by four years - that is the war in the Atlantic, the
Mediterranean and Europe.

The detailed answer for those theatres begins in the
Mediterranean.  There, in the autumn of 1941 against Rommel it
turned almost certain defeat into a stalemate.  If not then, then
certainly in the summer of 1941 after Rommel had returned to the
Egyptian frontier, it made a decisive contribution to keeping him
out of Egypt between his victory at the Battle of Gazala in 1942
and the British getting ready for their own victory at El
Alamein.

It did this chiefly by killing off his seaborne supplies.  Both
the Italian machine cipher and the airforce Enigma and a bit of
naval Enigma contributed decisively to starving Rommel of fuel
and replacement hardware and ammunition.

Without that, the commander of our own forces at the time,
General Auchinleck, concluded that Rommel would have got through
to Egypt.

As you know at that time the Allies themselves were landing in
North West Africa.  If they had lost Egypt they might have
abandoned the operation against North West Africa, especially as
they would also have lost Malta if Egypt went, and decided to
alter their strategy (we have to allow for this possibility) and
go back and concentrate on the North Sea and the direct Second
Front.

Now if they had stayed in the Mediterranean it would have taken
them a least a year longer than it actually took them from Tunis
and from the Western Desert to complete the conquest of North
Africa and open the Mediterranean.  That was successfully
achieved in May '43.

It wouldn't have been achieved in less than a year beyond that,
if we had gone on in spite of the loss of Egypt trying to do it.
It wouldn't have been achieved in time to do the Normandy
landings in 1944.

If they had abandoned the idea of re-conquering North Africa, the
most probable course would have been in fact what the Americans
had always wanted to do, to do the cross Channel invasion more
quickly than in fact occurred.  It in fact occurred in June '44.
They would have turned back and done that straight away, that was
their obvious alternative.

What would have been the prospect for that undertaking if Ultra
hadn't become available against the U-Boats in June 1941 and
radically reduced their successes against the convoys.

We know that in that second half of 1941 their shipping successes
were cut back to 120,000 tons a month average.  That has to be
compared not with the monthly average of 280,000 tons a months in
the four months before June '41 but with the sinkings they would
have achieved with their greater number of U-Boats.

It has been calculated that the Ultra saved about one and half
million tons in September, October, November and December '41.

And even if Britain's essential imports had not without that
reduction been reduced to a dangerously low level, the
intermission that provided was invaluable in enabling the British
to build up reserves in merchant shipping and develop anti-
submarine defences.

So that when the U-Boats returned to the Atlantic after their
first defeat (they did that in the autumn of 1942), they had been
delayed in making a decisive thrust for more than a year.  Now
when they returned they had been supplied with an advanced
Enigma, one that instead of using three wheels concurrently used
four wheels, which as you can see noticeably increased the
mathematical difficulties of solving the key.

In fact Bletchley couldn't solve it from February to December
1942.  Mercifully for us (though not for the Americans) most of
the U-Boats were on the Atlantic American coast at that time, but
as they came back to the North Atlantic convoys they were still
using this cipher and they brought about another crisis in the
Atlantic.

It again was the Ultra which brought them under control.  The
figures of sinkings of Allied shipping reached the highest in the
war in March '43.  They had been brought down by May '43 to lower
proportions than ever before in the war as a result of this
return of Ultra to the scene.

And so you can see that the problem of undertaking the Normandy
landings if those two defeats and controls of the U-Boats hadn't
occurred would have been very pronounced.

Then there was the contribution of Enigma to the Normandy
Landings themselves (I can't go into detail and will answer
questions if you need).  I think it is no exaggeration to say
that even if the U-Boats had prevented it from being attempted
only until '45, we would have found it an infinitely more
difficult operation to do than in 1944.  The Germans would have
completed the Atlantic defences, they would be bombarding Britain
with 'V' weapons on a massive scale, all of which was in the
event cut off by the '44 Landings.  And they would have had a
much bigger Panzer Army to deal with the problems.

My own calculation is we wouldn't in fact have been able to do
the Normandy Landings, even if we had left the Mediterranean
aside, until at the earliest 1946, probably a bit later.  It
would have then taken much longer to break through in France and
Germany than it did in fact take, which was a year from '44.  And
altogether therefore the war would have been something like two
years longer, perhaps three years longer, possibly four years
longer than it was.

I am sorry I have exceeded my length of time but I hope you will
forgive me, and I will do what I can to answer questions.


Q.  Would we have won the war without Ultra?

My own view is that given that the Soviets survived the German
attack and the Americans came in as they did, the combined forces
of Russia, America and the British would eventually have won the
war.  The long term relative strengths of Germany and those three
counties were such that Germany was bound to loose in the end.
But how lengthily and with what damage and destruction we should
have succeeded I don't know.  I think we would have won but it
would have been a long and much more brutal and destructive war.

Q.  Was Bletchley involved at all in cryptanalysis of the Russian
theatre?

We read a large amount of German signals from the Russian front,
but no work was done against Soviet signals after Germany invaded
Russia, on account of the high priority given to Axis signals.
On the other hand, co-operation with the Soviets was never as
close as it was with the USA.

Of course when the Americans came into the war in December '41 we
had already begun some development of a cryptanalytical
partnership with them, and when they came into the war that
partnership became almost so complete as to constitute a single
joint cryptanalytical effort.  Of course that effort involved
division of labour and the division of labour is much directed by
the interception facilities.  For example, except for the
Atlantic traffic the American coast couldn't intercept European,
German and Italian signals.  That was all being intercepted in
the UK.  Obvious solution - UK concentrates on decrypting, on
cryptanalysis against German and Italian.  America which can
intercept the Pacific from the Pacific and also has headquarters
in Brisbane and various places in the Pacific - America
concentrates of working on the Japanese.

But there are overlaps.  For example we have a cryptanalytical
annexe at Bletchley, we have it in Singapore, it moved to Hong
Kong, it moved to Ceylon, and from there it pitches in its bit by
serving the decrypts direct to the American Headquarters.
Similarly because the U-Boat traffic can be heard both in America
and in Britain, the two sides - Bletchley and the American Navy -
swopped keys.  They have got a direct line.  They say 'we will
take 4th June, you take tomorrow 5th June,' and so they split the
keys and swopped solutions.  So there was an almost total
amalgamation of resources and a logical division of labour.

Q.  Is it not the case that the arrival of the atom bomb in 1945
would have bought a quicker solution?

This is a problem because strict, sensible, proper counter-
factual history can't really take into account something like
that.  It is speculation.  But of course if my scenario is right
and the war was still struggling on and we had the bomb which
presumably we would still have had, the problem of whether to
drop it on Germany would have arisen.  And in some respects the
dropping of it on Germany would be more justified than the
dropping of it on Japan because Japan was visibly on her knees
when we dropped it on her, but in my scenario Germany would have
been far from on her knees.  So yes the prospects of it being
dropped as the solution are quite high.  I would mention it in a
speculative scenario.

Q.  How closely did Bletchley work with the Russians on
decryption?

It couldn't be as close as the collaboration I have described
with the Americans for a variety of reasons.  One is of course
that there just hadn't been the close relationship between the
two countries that existed historically between the British and
the Americans.  The other was that when we actually broke the
ciphers - Enigma in the first instance, but Fish later - that
were relevant to the Eastern Front, they were coming in to us at
a time when it was uncertain whether Russia would survive.  And
then later on when Russia had survived and we were reading more
ciphers both Fish and Enigma from the Eastern Front, there was
the problem that we knew from the Enigma that the Germans were
reading Russian ciphers, so that if they had too much Enigma
intelligence in their ciphers you see the security risk was
extremely high.  Then fourthly the Russians were not
collaborative.  They wanted any intelligence we supplied but they
wouldn't give any in return.  Not that they had much Sigint, but
they had a lot of other Intelligence.

The answer to your question is with all those difficulties we
couldn't have so close a collaboration with the Russians as we
had with Washington, but we started sending them a summary of
signal intelligence a week after they were attacked by the
Germans in '41.  We sent it via the British Military Mission in
Moscow where there were people to hand it over to the Russian
General Staff.

We had to have a cover for it, had to explain to them that this
is the horse's mouth but it is coming to us (this is the kind of
cover we used) it is coming to us from very high ranking German
officers who are slipping the news to us through Berne or
somewhere like that, and we are getting it quickly because we
have got pretty direct connections with Switzerland.

A steady stream of information about German intentions and
dispositions - Airforce and Army on the Eastern Front - were sent
to them.  They were interrupted from time to time when the
Russians were being particularly beastly.  For example at the top
of Russia, Murmansk at the Kola Inlet where all the convoys
taking arms to Russia and supplies were going, we had to keep
seamen, sailors, both to man the Allied facilities, unloading
facilities - of course the Russians were there too but we had to
keep some British sailors there.  And then we persuaded the
Russians to let us have an Intercept station there because half
of the traffic around the top of the North Cape was difficult to
intercept even in Northern Scotland.

And of course we covered the risk that they would suspect that we
were reading Enigma or that they would do more than suspect that,
by saying that the value of the traffic to us was that it enabled
us, by traffic analysis, to judge the German reactions to the
movements of the convoys.  So we had this little intercept
station and then the Russians locked them all up because they
thought we were spying on them, so you had all sorts of little
rows with them like that.  From time to time when it wasn't vital
we did say if you don't behave better than this we wont send you
your daily summary.  And we stopped it for a short time, then we
started again.  But it had to be of that character - the
collaboration.

Q.  Is there scope for counter-factual historians studying the
siege of Leningrad - if they had had access to the Ultra
information that you could have given them.

Again you have to bear in mind that there were problems.  For
example, one of the areas in which we found it extremely
difficult to intercept German signals because of radio conditions
or atmosphere conditions or whatever it is, was the North Cape;
and the other was the Leningrad area.  It was very difficult to
intercept from the Leningrad area because whatever frequency they
were using relative to the distances and the ionosphere we never
could cover the Leningrad area properly.  Caucaucus on the other
hand, Central Front, we could hear then as clear as a bell.

Q.  If the collaboration had been as close as with the Americans
. . .

It would have been an advantage if it had been as close as with
the Americans, it is quite true.  But on the other hand the risks
which I briefly portrayed were quite considerable.  And we did
our best to make sure that they knew about all the important
forthcoming development.  Don't forget they had very good
intelligence of their own, not primarily Sigint but they had very
good air reconnaissance and air superiority after a certain time,
and they had an enormous espionage system behind the German
lines.  So they weren't without information.  But we did do our
best to make sure that they got crucial early notice whenever we
got it ourselves.

It was a big dilemma and one that was fought about.  Churchill
wanted to risk it and let them have more.  Naturally the Ultra
authorities didn't want to risk it because everything hangs on it
you see, so there was a tussle all the time about how much to
send.

Q.  The was a programme recently on Kursk - one might say that a
Russian counter-factual historian would say that if we didn't
have the Ultra which we got in various ways, then we wouldn't
have been able to win the battle of Kursk and Hitler would have
been able to carve up Russia.  This is perhaps another case . . .

Another case.  Stalingrad of course is another one.  Those two
battles were crucial, especially Stalingrad.  Again it wasn't
only through us they were getting . . . we did give them the
central facts in advance of Kursk.  But as we now know, we didn't
know at the time, the one single Russian agent in Bletchley was
at that time (just that short period of time before and after
Kursk in '43) actually giving them decrypts through the Russian
Embassy in London.  So all sorts of complications about the
story.  He didn't know that they were getting the supply from
London officially, and we didn't know that he was sending the
decrypts unofficially.  Quite a complex problem!

Q.  Did they never figure out that this was coming from decrypts?

We are never quite clear.  Certainly when this man at Bletchley
who only surfaced after the war - the secret about him only
surfaced after the war - they knew that what they were getting
from him was decrypts.  They must then have known that our
summaries were decrypts.  But that didn't alter our practice
because we didn't know that he was sending them the decrypts.

Q.  How was the Ultra Information disguised so that the Germans
couldn't work out that you were decrypting them?

How did we disguise what we had got you mean?

Q.  How did you disguise, for example, that a particular
submarine was going through a particular area?  How could you
disguise it so that it wasn't obvious that you'd intercepted it?

Let me give you an example of how we took the precautions, using
it without on the other hand giving grounds for suspicion to the
other side.  The most dramatic example comes from the
Mediterranean where we sank at two or three stages in the war
something from 40% to 60% of every ship that left the north shore
of the Mediterranean for North Africa.  60% of the shipping was
sunk, for example, just before the Battle of Alamein and again
just before Gazala when Rommel was stopped.

Every one of those ships before it was attacked and sunk had to
be sighted by a British aeroplane or submarine which had been put
in a position in which it would sight it without it knowing that
it had been put in that position, and had made a sighting signal
which the Germans and the Italians had intercepted.  That was the
standard procedure.  As a consequence of that the Germans and the
Italians assumed that we had 400 submarines whereas we had 25.
And they assumed that we had a huge reconnaissance airforce on
Malta, whereas we had three aeroplanes!

But solemnly that procedure had to be followed by the commanders.
When they in their little centre in Cairo or, as it was later on
Algiers, said we can't sink all those seventeen ships today,
which five are we going to take first and which five will we take
second, when they were doing this they had to arrange that
procedure before they hit a single ship.

Similar precautions were taken in the Atlantic, but there the
problem was different.  That is why the Germans got most
suspicious about the Atlantic.  The great feature there was that
the Enigma was used in the first instance not to fight the U-
Boats but to evade them.  And the problem was how could you evade
them without their noticing.  You have a situation on the graph
in which the number of U-Boats at sea in the Atlantic is going
up, and the number of convoys they see is going down!

How do you cover that?  We did cover it but it was done by a
different system from what I have just described in the
Mediterranean.  We let captured Germans, people we had captured
from U-Boats write home from prison camp and we instructed our
people when interrogated by Germans - our pilots for example - to
propagate the view that we had absolutely miraculous radar which
could detect a U-Boat even if it was submerged from hundreds of
miles.  And the Germans believed it.

They had an enquiry saying 'surely it must be possible that it is
the Enigma that isn't safe.'  And the cipher men come back and
say 'it can't be the Enigma.'  So somebody gets up and says
'well, it must be this bloody radar that we have heard about.'
And so they decided.  But you see different solutions had to be
adopted for each particular situation.  But these were the kind
of precautions that were taken I think with great success.  I
mean they never really did tumble to the idea that it was unsafe,
which is pretty marvellous really.

