
************************************************************************
*              Document from the CPSR Internet Library                 *
*                                                                      *
*  Ftp/Gopher/WAIS: cpsr.org    email: listserv@cpsr.org  "help"       *
*   For more information contact: cpsr@csli.stanford.edu  415-322-3778 *
************************************************************************




                                                                       
                                                      F90-876   F90-933
                     NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL        F90-1159  F91-33C
                      WASHINGTON, D.C., 20506


                           April 1, 1992

Dear Mr. Rotenberg:

This is in further response to your Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA) request of September 13, 1990, for "a copy of the revised
National Security Decision Directive 145, signed by the President
on July 5, 1990. This letter also responds to referrals from
the Department of Defense, dated September 28, 1990, and November
20, 1990 (DoD case number 90-FOI-1584/m), of your request to that
agency for the same document.

The National Security Council (NSC) staff has completed its
review of National Security Directive 42 and determined that a
partial text version of the document may be released. The
withheld portion of the document is properly classified under the
provisions of Executive Order 12356 and, therefore, is exempt
from disclosure under 5 U.S.C. 552 (b)(1).

Furthermore, the NSC staff has determined that the release of the
format of NSD 42 could cause damage to the national security,
and, therefore, the format of this document is properly clas-
sified under the provisions of Executive order 12356. The format
of this document is also denied under 5 U.S.C. 552 (b)(1). A
redacted copy of the partial text release is enclosed.

You may appeal this denial by writing to the Executive Secretary,
National Security Council, Washington, D.C. 20506, within sixty
(60) days of the receipt of this letter.

We appreciate your patience while we processed your request.


                                                Sincerely,

                                                /sig/
                                                Steven D. Tilly
                                                Director 
                                                Information Disclosure

Enclosure: a/s

Mr. Marc Rotenberg
Computer Professionals for
Social Responsibility
1025 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Suite 1015
Washington, D.C. 20036


-----------------------------------------------------------------

                                    UNCLASSIFIED    July 5. 1990

National Policy for the Security of National
Security Telecommunications and Information
Systems


Continuing advances in microelectronics technology have
stimulated an unprecedented growth in the demand for and supply
of telecommunications and information processing services within
the government and throughout the private sector. As new
technologies have been applied, traditional distinctions between
telecommunications and information systems have begun to
disappear. Although this trend promises greatly improved
efficiency and effectiveness, it also poses significant security
challenges.

Telecommunications and information processing systems are highly
susceptible to interception, unauthorized electronic access, and
related forms of technical exploitation, as well as other
dimensions of the foreign intelligence threat. The technology to
exploit these electronic systems is widespread and is used
extensively by foreign nations and can be employed, as well, by
terrorist groups and criminal elements. A comprehensive and
coordinated approach must be taken to protect the government's
national security telecommunications and information systems
(national security systems) against current and projected
threats. This approach must include mechanisms for formulating
policy, overseeing systems security resources programs, and
coordinating and executing technical activities.

This Directive establishes initial objectives of policies, and an
organizational structure to guide the conduct of activities to
secure national security systems from exploitation; establishes a
mechanism for policy development and dissemination; and assigns
responsibilities for implementation. It is intended to ensure
full participation and cooperation among the various existing
centers of technical expertise throughout the Executive branch,
and to promote a coherent and coordinated defense against the
foreign intelligence threat to these systems. This Directive
recognizes the special requirements for protection of
intelligence sources and methods.

                                               [1]

------------------------------------------------------------

1. _Objectives_. Ensuring the security of national security
systems is vitally important to the operational
effectiveness of the national security activities of the
government and to military combat readiness. I therefore,
direct that the government's capabilities for securing
national security systems against technical exploitation
threats be maintained or, if inadequate, improved to provide
for:

a. Reliable and continuing assessment of threats and
vulnerabilities, and implementation of appropriate
effective countermeasures;

b. A technical base within the U.S. Government to
achieve this security, and initiatives with the private
sector to maintain, complement, or enhance that
government technical base and to ensure information
systems security products are available to secure
national security systems; and;

c. Effective and efficient application of U.S.
Government resources.

2. _Policies_. In support of these objectives the following
policies are established:

a. U.S. Government national security systems shall be
secured by such means as are necessary to prevent
compromises denials or exploitation; 

b. Federal agencies shall require that national
security systems operated and maintained by U.S.
Government contractors likewise be secured.

3. _Implementation_. This Directive establishes an NSC
Policy Coordinating Committee for National Security
Telecommunications and Information Systems, an interagency
group at the operating level, an executive agent and a
national manager to implement these objectives and policies.

4. _National Security Council/Policy Coordinating Committee
for National Security Telecommunications and Information
Systems_.

The National Security Council/Policy Coordinating Committee
(PCC) for National Security Telecommunications, chaired by the
Department of Defense, under the authority of National Security
Directives I and 10f assumed the responsibility for the National
security Telecommunications NSDD 97 Steering Group. By authority

                                             [2]

of this Directive, the PCC for National Security Telecommunica-
tions is renamed the PCC for National Security Telecommunications
and Information Systems, and shall expand its authority to
include the responsibilities to protect the government's national
security telecommunications and information systems. When
addressing issues concerning the security of national security
telecommunications and information systems, the membership of the
PCC shall be expanded to include representatives of the Secretary
Of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General,
the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Commerce, and the
Director of Central Intelligence. The National Manager for
National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems
Security shall be invited as an observer. The Policy
Coordinating Committee shall:

a. Oversee the implementation of this Directive;

b. Develop Policy recommendations and provide guidance
to the operating level National Security
Telecommunications and Information Systems Security
Committee (NSTISSC);

c. Review and resolve matters referred to it by the
NSTISSC in fulfilling the responsibilities outlined in
paragraph 5, below; -

d. Be subject to the policies of the Director of
Central Intelligence on matters pertaining to the
protection of intelligence sources and methods; and,

e. Recommend for Presidential approval additions or
revisions to this Directive as national interests may
require.

5. _The National Security Telecommunications and Information
Systems Security Committee._

a. The NSTISSC is established to consider technical
matters and develop operating policies, procedures,
guidelines, instructions, and standards as necessary to
implement provisions of this Directive. The Committee
shall be chaired by the Assistant Secretary of Defense
(Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence) and
shall be composed of a voting representative of each of
the following:

                                           [3]

The Secretary of State
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Transportation
The Secretary of Energy
Director, Office of Management and Budget
Assistant to the President for National Security
    Affairs
Director of Central Intelligence
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation
Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency
Administrator, General Services Administration
The Chief of Staff, United States Army
The Chief of Naval Operations
The Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Director, National Security Agency
Manager, National Communications System
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

b. The NSTISSC shall:

(1) Develop such specific operating policies,
procedures, guidelines, instructions, standards,
objectives, and priorities as may be required to
implement this Directive; 

(2) Provide systems security guidance for
national security systems to Executive departments
and agencies;

(3) Submit annually to the Executive Agent an
evaluation of the security status of national
security systems with respect to established
objectives and priorities;

(4) Approve the release of cryptologic national
security systems technical security material,
information, and techniques to foreign governments
or international organizations. The concurrence
of the Director of Central Intelligence shall be
obtained with respect to those activities which he
manages;

                                             [4]


(5) Establish and maintain a national  system  for
promulgating the operating policies, instructions,
directives, and guidancet which may be  issued
pursuant to this Directive;

(6)  Establish permanent and temporary
subcommittees as necessary to discharge its
responsibilities;

(7)  Make recommendations to the PCC for NSTISSC
membership and establish criteria and procedures
for permanent observers from other departments  or
agencies affected by specific matters under
deliberation, who may attend meetings upon
invitation of the Chairman; and,

(8)  Interact, as necessary, with the National
Communications System Committee of  Principals
established by Executive Order 12472 to ensure the
coordinated execution of assigned
responsibilities.


c.  The Committee shall have two subcommittees, one
focusing on telecommunications security and one
focusing an information systems  security.  The  two
subcommittees shall coordinate their actions and
recommendations concerning implementation of  protective
measures, which shall combine and coordinate both  areas
where appropriate.

d. The Committee shall have a  permanent  secretariat
composed of personnel of the National Security Agency
and such other personnel from Executive departments  and
agencies represented on the Committee as  are  requested
by the Chairman. The National Security  Agency  shall
provide facilities and support  as  required.  Other
Executive departments and agencies shall provide
facilities and support as requested by the  Chairman.


6.  The Executive Aaent of the Government for National
Security Telecommunications and information Systems
Security.

 a. Consistent with the authority  for  communications
 security given the Secretary of Defense in  Executive
 Order 12333, the Secretary of Defense shall serve  as
 Executive Agent of the Government for National  Security
 Telecommunications and Information Systems Security  and
 shall be responsible for implementing, under his
 signature, policies and procedures to:

(1) Ensure the development, in conjunction with
Committee member departments and agencies of
plans and programs to fulfill the objectives of
this Directive, including the development of
necessary security architectures;

(2) Procure for and provide to Executive
departments and agencies and, where appropriate,
to government contractors and foreign governments,
consistent with the laws of the United States
such technical security material, other technical
assistance, and other related services of common
concern as required to accomplish the objectives
of this Directive;

(3) Approve and provide minimum security
standards and doctrine for systems subject to this
Directive; (U)

(4) Conducts approve, or endorse research and
development of techniques and equipment to secure
national security systems; and,

(5) Operate, or coordinate the efforts, of U.S.
Government technical centers related to national
security telecommunications and information
systems security.

b. The Executive Agent shall review and assess the
National Manager's recommendations on the proposed
national security telecommunications and information
systems security programs and budgets for the Executive
departments and agencies. Where appropriate,
alternative systems security recommendations will be
provided to agency heads, to National Security Council
Committees and to the OMB. In addition, the Executive
Agent shall submit, annually, the security status of
national security systems with respect to established
objectives and priorities through the National Security
Council to the President.

7. _The National Manager for National Security
Telecommunications and Information Systems Security_.

The Director, National Security Agency, is designated the
National Manager for National Security Telecommunications and
Information Systems Security and is responsible to the Secretary
of Defense as Executive Agent for carrying out the foregoing
responsibilities. In fulfilling these responsibilities the
National Manager shall:
                                             [6]

a. Examine U.S. Government national security systems
and evaluate their vulnerability to foreign
interception and exploitation. Any such activities,
including those involving monitoring of official
telecommunications, shall be conducted in strict
compliance with law, Executive Order and implementing
procedures, and applicable Presidential directive. No
monitoring shall be performed without advising the
heads of the agencies, departments, or services
concerned;

b. Act as the U.S. Government focal point for
cryptography, telecommunications systems security, and
information systems security for national security
systems;

C. Conduct, approve, or endorse research and
development of techniques and equipment to secure
national security systems;

d. Review and approve all standards, techniques,
systems, and equipment related to the security of
national security systems;

e. Conduct foreign computer security and
communications security liaison, including entering
into agreements with foreign governments and with
international and private organizations regarding
national security systems, except for those foreign
intelligence relationships conducted for intelligence
purposes by the Director of Central Intelligence. Any
such agreements shall be coordinated with affected
departments and agencies;

f. Operate such printing and fabrication facilities as
may be required to perform critical functions related
to the provisions of cryptographic and other technical
security material or services;

g. Assess the overall security posture of and
disseminate information on threats to and
vulnerabilities of national security systems;

h. Operate a central technical center to evaluate and
certify the security of national security
telecommunications and information systems;
                                         [7]

i. Prescribe the minimum standards, methods and
procedures for protecting cryptographic and other
technical security material, techniques, and
information related to national security systems;

j. Review and assess annually the national security
telecommunications systems security programs and
budgets of Executive departments and agencies of the
U.S. Government, and recommend alternatives, where
appropriate, for the Executive Agent;

k. Review annually the aggregated national security
information systems security program and budget
recommendations of the Executive departments and
agencies of the U.S. Government for the Executive Agent;

l. Request from the heads of Executive departments and
agencies such information and technical support as may
be needed to discharge the responsibilities assigned
herein;

m. Coordinate with the National Institute for
Standards and Technology in accordance with the
provisions of the Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L.
100-235); and

n. Enter into agreements for the procurement of
technical-security material and other equipment, and
their provision to Executive departments and agencies,
where appropriate, to government contractors, and
foreign governments.

8. _The Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies shall_:

a. Be responsible for achieving and maintaining secure
national security systems within their departments or
agencies;

b. Ensure that policies, procedures, guidelines,
instructions, and standards issued pursuant to this
Directive are implemented within their departments or
agencies; and

c. Provide to the NSTISSC, the Executive Agent, and
the National Manager, as appropriate, such information
as may be required to discharge responsibilities
assigned herein, consistent with relevant law,
Executive Order, and Presidential directive.

                                                   [8]

9. _Additional Responsibilities_. The Director, Office of
Management and Budget, shall:

a. Specify data to be provided during the annual
budget review by Executive departments and agencies on
program and budgets relating to security of their
national security systems;

b. Consolidate and provide such data to the National
Manager via the Executive Agent; and

C. Review for consistency with this Directive, and
amend as appropriate, OMB policies and regulations
which may pertain to the subject matter herein.

10.  _Nothing in this Directive shall_:

a. Alter or supersede the existing authorities of the
Director of Central Intelligence;

b. Authorize the Committee, the Executive Agent, or
the National Manager authority to examine the
facilities of other Executive departments and agencies
without approval of the head of such department or
agency, nor to request or collect information
concerning their operation for any purpose not provided
for herein;

c. Amend or contravene the provisions of existing law,
Executive Order, or Presidential directive which
pertain to the protection of sensitive information, to
the protection of national security information, to the
privacy aspects or financial management of information
systems or to the administrative requirements for
safeguarding such resources against fraud, waste, and
abuse;

d. Provide authority to issue policies, procedure,
guidelines, instructions, standards, or priorities or
operate programs concerning security of systems other
than national security systems;

e. Be intended to establish additional review
processes for the procurement of information processing
systems;

f. Alter or rescind policies or programs begun under
PD-24 or NSDD-145 that may be pertinent to national
security systems. Policies or programs retained
pursuant to this provision shall not be construed to
apply to systems within the purview of the Computer
Security Act of 1987 (PL100-235); or

                                            [9]


[Approximately 2 paragraphs of material redacted]


11. For the purposes of this Directive the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:

a. _Telecommunications_ means the preparation
transmission, communications or related processing of
information (writing, images, sounds or other data) by
electrical, electromagnetic, electromechanical,
electro-optical, or electronic means;

b. _Information Systems_ means any equipment or
interconnected system or subsystems of equipment that
is used in the automatic acquisition storage
manipulation, management, movement, control, display,
switching interchange, transmission, or reception of
data and includes computer software, firmware, and
hardware;

c. _Telecommunications and Information Systems Security_
means protection afforded to telecommunications and
information systems in order to prevent exploitation
through interception, unauthorized electronic access,
or related technical intelligence threats, and to
ensure authenticity. Such protection results from the
application of security measures (including
cryptosecurity, transmission security, emission
security, and computer security) to systems which
generate, store process transfer, or communicate
information of use to an adversary, and also includes
the physical protection of technical security material
and technical security information;

d. _Technical security_ material means equipment
components, devices, and associated documentation or
other media which pertain to cryptographic or to the
securing of telecommunications and information systems;


e. _National security systems_ are those
telecommunications and information systems operated by
the U.S. Government, its contractors, or agents that
contain classified information or, as set forth in 10
U.S.C. Section 2315, that involves intelligence
activities involves cryptologic activities related to
national security, involves command and control Of
military forces, involves equipment that is an integral
part of a weapon or weapon system, or involves
equipment that is critical to the direct fulfillment of
military or intelligence missions.

12. Except for ongoing telecommunications protection
activities mandated by and pursuant to PD-24 and NSDD-145,
NSDD-145 is hereby rescinded.


[Documents obtained by Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
under the Freedom of Information Act, April 1992. For more information
on CPSR's work on cryptography and computer security, contact David
Banisar (banisar@washofc.cpsr.org) or (202) 544-9240. For general 
information on CPSR, contact cpsr@csli.stanford.edu , Ph. (415) 322-3778.]



