
      THE ACA CONSTITUTION (1982)

Article I - Name and Official Emblem

Section 1. The name of this association shall
be The American Cryptogram Association.

Section 2. The official emblem of the Associa-
tion shall be the scytale.

Article II - Purpose

Section 1. The purpose of this Association is
to help its members improve their knowledge
of cryptology and to make available materials
and publications to assist in the study of this
subject.

Section 2. This Association shall be non-profit,
nonpartisan, nonsectional and nonsectarian.

Article III - Membership

Section 1. Any person with an interest in
cryptology shall be eligible for membership.

Section 2. Applications for membership shall
be in writing, on forms provided for that pur-
pose, and signed by the applicant.

Section 3. Annual dues shall be payable in
advance to the Treasurer, the amount thereof
as determined from time to time by the Execu-
tive Board. A subscription to "The Crypto-
gram", the Association's official publication,
which is included in each dues payment, may
also be obtained by payment of an annual fee
equal to the annual dues.

Section 4a. Any member more than one
month in arrears for dues shall be automatical-
ly expelled from membership. However, upon
written request by the delinquent member, the
Executive Board, at its discretion, may grant
further time for payment. Upon receipt of the
renewal check membership will start again
with the then current issue. Back issues will
have to be bought from "For Sale" items, as
listed in "The Cryptogram".

Section 4b. Any member may resign from the
Association upon written notice to the Treasur-
er, but dues are not refundable.

Section 4c. Any member may be suspended
by a majority vote of the Executive Board after
written charges filed by another member have
been investigated by the Board and the ac-
cused has been given an opportunity to read
the charges and to reply. A suspended mem-
ber shall have the right of appeal to the mem-
bership at the next annual business meeting
and may be recommended for reinstatement
by a majority vote of the members present.

Section 5. Each member shall be entitled to
cast one vote for the annual election of offi-
cers via the official ballot and, if present at the
annual business meeting, to vote on any
issues that are considered.

Article IV - Officers

Section 1a. The elective officers of the Associ-
ation shall consist of a President, Vice-Presi-
dent, Secretary, Treasurer, and two Honorary
Vice-Presidents. The Honorary Vice-Presidents
shall be chosen in recognition of their services
to the Association but not charged with any
specific responsibilities.

Section 1b. The positions of Historian and
Editor shall be filled by appointment by the
Executive Board at its first "meeting" and each
incumbent shall be an officer of the Associa-
tion.

Section 1c. The Publisher of "The Cryptogram"
shall be chosen by the Executive Board at its
first "meeting".

Section 2. The President shall be the chief
executive officer of the Association, shall
appoint committee chairmen, shall be ex-
officio a member of all committees, and shall
preside at the annual business meeting.

Section 3. The Vice-President shall assist the
President and shall perform the duties of the
President during the absence of the President
or the inability of the President to act.

Section 4. The Secretary shall record the
minutes of the annual meeting of the Associa-
tion, announce the results of the mail ballots
from the membership, and report the formal
actions of the Executive Board during the past
year.

Section 5. The Treasurer shall be the custodi-
an of all monies and other financial assets of
the Association, shall maintain full and accu-
rate records of all receipts and expenditures,
shall keep track of membership dues, shall
pay all properly presented bills, and shall
prepare an annual report to be published in
"The Cryptogram". Other responsibilities shall
be: to receive dues, keep track of noms, and
send out necessary materials to new mem-
bers. The Treasurer shall also make recom-
mendations to the Executive Board for the
investment of surplus or reserve funds. If the
need arises, the Treasurer shall suggest a
member to serve as his/her assistant during
his/her term of office; said assistant to replace
the Treasurer should the Treasurer be unable
to continue in office.

Section 6. The Historian shall be responsible
for the preparation and/or updating of the
official History of the Association. The Histori-
an shall also seek and solicit copies of Associ-
ation records, minutes, rosters, Executive
Board "meetings", memorabilia, artifacts, and
other material related to the Association's
History, for the purpose of organizing and
maintaining an official collection of historical
material.

Section 7. The Editor shall collect, select and
edit material for "The Cryptogram", allowing
nothing of a defamatory or libelous nature nor
anything classified as "National Security" to
appear.

Section 8. The Publisher shall be responsible
for printing and distributing "The Cryptogram"
following the editorial direction of the Editor.
The Publisher shall also maintain the official
roster of the Association and be responsible
for its printing and distribution, as well as
other publications, as directed by the Execu-
tive Board.

Section 9. All officers shall preside in their
respective duties at the annual business
meeting. If any officer be absent, an alternate
shall be assigned to conduct the affairs of the
Association. The minutes, Treasurer's report,
and other pertinent material shall be forwarded
by the responsible officers to the Editor for
publication in "The Cryptogram".

Section 10. All officers and volunteer workers
in the Association shall serve without mone-
tary compensation except for reimbursement
of reasonable expenses. Honoraria may be
awarded by the Executive Board after consid-
eration of such recommendations voted by the
members at the annual business meeting.

Section 11. All officers, committee chairmen,
and other members performing duties on
behalf of the Association shall deliver to their
successors all files, papers, records, or prop-
erty of any character belonging to the Associa-
tion which shall be in their possession at the
close of their term of office or completion of
their assignment.

Article V - Executive Board

Section 1. The property, business and general
conduct of the Association shall be managed,
except as otherwise provided in this constitu-
tion and bylaws, by an Executive Board com-
posed of the President, Vice-President, Secre-
tary, Treasurer, Editor and Historian. This
board shall hold quarterly "meetings", at mini-
mum, by mail when an assembled meeting of
a majority of the Board is not feasible.

Section 2. At its own discretion, the Executive
Board may elect two additional members to
their board for the remainder of the term.

Section 3. If any place on the Executive Board
becomes vacant, the remaining members may
fill the vacancy by majority vote for the unex-
pired term. Notice of such appointment shall
be published in "The Cryptogram" immediately
thereafter.

Article VI - Nomination and Election of
Officers

Section 1. A nominating committee consisting
of the President as chairman; the Vice-Presi-
dent, and two past presidents appointed by
the chairman shall select and furnish to the
Executive Board before March 1st, a single
slate of nominees for the elective offices of the
Association.  Following approval by a majority
of the Executive Board, this slate of nominees
shall be published in the May-June issue of
"The Cryptogram".

Section 2. Additional nominations may be
made by petition, signed by at least ten mem-
bers in good standing, and filed with the
Secretary by not later than June 1st.  No
nominations may be made thereafter.

Section 3. All nominations shall appear on an
official ballot which shall be mailed to each
member by the Publisher not later than August
1st.  This ballot shall give the name and
address of the person designated to receive
the ballots.  The poll shall close at the conven-
ing of the business meeting at the annual
convention, or if no convention is held, the
date and time shall be set by the Executive
Board and printed on the ballot.

Section 4. Election shall be by plurality of the
votes cast by official ballot.  To be counted, a
ballot must be signed by the voting member.
In the event of a tie, the winner shall be deter-
mined by lot at that time and in accordance
with any such method as the presiding officer
of the business meeting may direct.

Article VII - Terms of Office

Section 1. The terms of office for all elected
officials shall be from the time the results of
the official balloting are publicly reported at
the annual business meeting until the next
year's election results are similarly announced.
In the absence of an annual business meeting
the terms shall coincide with the Secretary's
tally of the ballots on the date set by the
Executive Board and printed on the ballots.

Section 2. Officials appointed by the Executive
Board shall serve until their successors are
appointed or, in the case of special appoint-
ees, their assignments are completed.  No
appointees shall continue in office after the
annual election unless they are reappointed at
the first "meeting" of the Executive Board.

Article VIII - Committees

Section 1. There shall be six standing commit-
tees of the Association: the Awards Commit-
tee, the Correspondence Committee, the Kent
State University Library Liaison Committee, the
Publications Committee, the Sales Committee,
and the Welcoming Committee.

Section 2. The duties of the Awards Com-
mittee shall be to recommend nominees to the
Executive Board for the DAMON Award,
CHERRY BLOSSOM Award, and other Awards
that may be established or which the commit-
tee may deem it advisable to recommend.
The President shall present the awards recom-
mended.

Section 3. The duties of the Correspondence
Committee shall be to respond to inquiries
regarding membership and other matters from
the public and to direct letters requiring a
specialized reply to appropriate individuals in
the Association.

Section 4. The Kent State University Library
Liaison Committee shall be responsible for the
enlargement of the DAMON (George C. Lamb)
collection and cooperating with its Librarian in
any efforts for the betterment of the collection
and usage by Association members.

Section 5. The Publications Committee shall
be responsible for recommending to the
Executive Board publications and other items
of cryptologic interest for financing and/or
sponsorship by the Association.

Section 6. The Sales Committee shall be
responsible for the sale of materials available
from the Association, maintaining adequate
stocks and keeping accurate records of all
transactions. The committee shall also recom-
mend to the Executive Board the addition or
discontinuance of items offered for sale.

Section 7. The Welcoming Committee shall be
responsible for welcoming new members to
the Association and supplying them with their
membership cards.

Section 8. The names of volunteer helpers,
assistants, staff members, and others recruited
by committee chairmen, the Editor, the Pub-
lisher, and other officers shall be reported to
the President for recognition by the Executive
Board and transmittal to the chairman of the
Awards Committee.

Article IX - Annual Convention and Busi-
ness Meeting

Section 1. The annual convention of the Asso-
ciation, if held, shall be held between August
7 and September 15 in each year, at a time
and place designated by the Executive Board.
If invitations to host the next convention are
not received at the convention each officer
shall solicit and encourage "bids" for the
convention from members in their local areas
and other active members to ensure that a
convention is held.

Section 2. Notices giving the location and date
of the annual convention, if held, will be pub-
lished in the May-June issue of "The Crypto-
gram".

Section 3. At the annual convention sufficient
time shall be set aside for an annual business
meeting held for the purpose of hearing re-
ports, messages and recommendations made
by members assembled. All such proposals
and recommendations made by members at
that time shall be reported to the Executive
Board for their consideration and action.
Results of the official balloting for the election
of officers and any other matters on the ballot
shall be announced at the annual business
meeting and published in "The Cryptogram".

Article X - Publications

Section 1. The Association shall publish, on a
periodic basis, an official magazine titled "The
Cryptogram", which shall be mailed to all
members and subscribers. The size, number
of pages, and frequency of publication shall
be determined by the Executive Board.

Section 2. Other publications and items of
cryptographic interest approved by the Execu-
tive Board shall be financed by the Associa-
tion. Such materials shall be judged on their
educational merit and value to members and
others, and need not be good business invest-
ments so long as an ample reserve fund for
publication of "The Cryptogram" is preserved.

Section 3. The Association's Library shall be
maintained as the DAMON (George C. Lamb)
collection at the Kent State University in Kent,
Ohio.

Article XI - Amendments

A proposed amendment must be signed by
not less than ten members in good standing
and filed with the Secretary who shall provide
for its publication for the information of the
entire membership. Voting on such proposed
amendments shall be by an official ballot
which shall be mailed to the entire member-
ship as stated in Article VI, Section 3. To be
counted, a ballot must be signed by the voting
member. This Constitution shall be amended
by a two-thirds vote of the members voting,
provided that at least thirty affirmative votes
are cast.

Article XII - Dissolution

Upon the dissolution or termination of the
Association, after paying all outstanding liabili-
ties, the remaining assets shall be distributed
to the Kent State Library specifically designat-
ed for the betterment of the DAMON (George
C. Lamb) collection established by the Associ-
ation.


Copyright 1993 American Cryptogram Association
Reproduction approved for Bulletin Board Service
11-28-93 by the ACA Editor.

Note: Revision of this constitution is currently
under consideration.

