
Instructions

Wdcrak is Copyrighted software.  
Unauthorized copying or distribution of 
Wdcrak is a criminal violation of Federal 
Law.

Copyright (C) by John E. Kuslich 1994. All 
rights reserved.

Version 1.0 09/24/94

1)	Installation

	Wdcrak will install itself.  Just insert 
the diskette in the a: or the b: drive and 
type A:setup or b:setup as appropriate.  
Wdcrak will not alter your autoexec.bat or 
your config.sys files.  No .ini files are 
created nor are any .ini files altered.

	Wdcrak does add some files to your 
windows/system directory however.  There 
are Visual Basic runtime files needed by the 
program.  They are vbrun300.dll and others. 

	Be sure to install Wdcrak only in the 
following directory: C:\wdcrak.

2)	Use License

	You are authorized to use Wdcrak 
on one computer at a time.  You may not 
install Wdcrak on a network or on multiple 
computers so that more than on user could 
use Wdcrak on more than one computer at 
a time.  Site licenses are available for a fee. 
Contact CRAK Software for details.

	You may make copies of WDcrak 
and distributes them to others provided that 
you do not reveal the security code 
necessary to access the full features of the 
program.  You must, however, distribute the 
software in its entirety including these 
instructions (minus the security code). 

3) 	Opening Display

	Click on the Wdcrak icon and start 
the application just as you would any other 
Windows application.

	If you have purchased the full 
capability version of Wdcrak, you may enter 
the security code to enable Wdcrak.  Be 
sure to follow the instructions given with the 
security code exactly, using the proper 
letter case as described.

	If you do not know the security 
code, Wdcrak will only reveal passwords of 
exactly ten characters.  Simply click on the 
“Don’t Know” option button to start the 
program.

4)	Selecting a File

	Wdcrak uses standard Windows 
dialog boxes to allow you to examine and 
select any file on any disk in you system.  
Select the appropriate disk, then the proper 
directory, and then click or double click on 
the file you want to crack.

5)	Exiting Wdcrak

	Wdcrak may be exited at any time 
simply by clicking on the “Exit” button in the 
lower right portion of the display.

6)	Wait for Processing

	Unfortunately, Wdcrak must do an 
enormous amount of processing to collect 
file statistics and determine the encryption 
key used.  Please be patient.  The 
Horizontal scroll bar at the bottom of the 
Wdcrak window will continue to slide back 
and forth as processing continues.

7)	Check the Decode Grid
 *****VERY IMPORTANT*****

	It is vital that you check the text 
appearing in the decode grid when the 
program pauses and puts up a message 
box.  Click on the “OK” button first and then 
use the vertical scroll bar at the right to 
examine the decoded text.

	If there are obvious errors such as 
Capital letters where none belong, or there 
are nonsense characters in certain 
positions, simply use the mouse to click on 
the cell that is wrong and type the letter you 
think should be there. Remember, use the 
proper case.  

	Notice that when you type in a new 
character, all the characters in that column 
of text also change to other characters (not 
what you typed).  If all the characters in 
the column you have changed look correct, 
then go on and correct the next column.  It 
is kind of like solving a big crossword 
puzzle only very very much easier because 
the vertical scroll bar allows you to see so 
much text and the text becomes more and 
more readable and obvious as each 
correction is made.

	Usually there is absolutely no need 
for correction and the user may then simply 
click on the “Find Password” button the get 
the password.

	Sometimes all of the text in a 
particular column looks correct except for 
one nonsense character.  This is probably a 
formatting character (Tab etc.).  *******DO 
NOT CORRECT THESE FORMATTING 
CHARACTERS****** if the rest if the 
characters in the same column seem to be 
correct.

8) 	Click On the “Find Password” 
Button

Ta Da!!!  The password will appear.

A nice surprise appears also.  Our founder 
(Head Geek) is very proud of his hat and 
bandanna!!!

9)	Limitations

	Wdcrak requires standard English 
text for proper decoding of files.  If the file is 
not more or less standard English or have 
the frequency distribution characteristics of 
standard English, *************Wdcrak may 
fail miserably

	We are sorry if the program 
fails...there are no guarantees or warrantees 
of any kind either expressed or implied for 
Wdcrak.  Use the program at your own 
risk...it may fail to find your password.

	Wdcrak works for all passwords(as 
far as we know) except for length 15 
passwords.  Only every other letter of length 
15 passwords is revealed.  Usually this is 
enough to allow really good guesses as to 
the actual password. If the password is 
made up of random characters and is of 
length 15, sorry, again the program will fail 
because you will only know half of the 
characters.  You will however be able to 
view the decoded file and read it’s contents.


9)  Purchasing Wdcrak

Send $99 Payable to CRAK:

CRAK
2901 E. Greenway Pkwy.
PO Box 31844
Phoenix, AZ 85046-1844

Or

Fax Us At: 1 602 548 1993

Call Us At: 1 800 484 9628 ext 7584 
(Orders only please).

We will ship by any method you specify.  
Many of our customers prefer Overnight 
Express COD.  We will arrange this for an 
additional $15 fee for shipping and COD 
cost.

Happy password hunting!

John E. Kuslich
President, CRAK Software

Johnk@indirect.com
72510,3115 on Compuserve
Crak Software   		Tel:800 484 9628 ext 7584
2901 E. Greenway Parkway   		Fax:602 548 1993
PO Box 41844
Phoenix, AZ 85046-1844


