Governmental Restrictions on the Development and
 Dissemination of Cryptographic Technologies: The
 Controversy Over NIST Standardization on DSS and
 Related Intellectual Property Issues

Twentieth Annual Telecommunications Policy Research Conference
Solomons Island, Maryland
September 12 - 14, 1992

David L. Sobel
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
666 Pennsylvania Avenue, S.E.
Washington, DC 20003
(202) 544-9240
Internet: sobel@washofc.cpsr.org

******************************************************

        On August 30, 1991, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology ("NIST") published a notice in the Federal Register
proposing a federal digital signature standard ("DSS").  The NIST
proposal, and details of the standard setting process that
recently have come to light, raise substantial questions
concerning the future of U.S. information policy in general and
cryptographic technology in particular.

        The DSS provides a means of authenticating the integrity of
electronically transmitted data and the identity of the sender.
According to NIST, the standard is "applicable to all federal
departments and agencies for the protection of unclassified
information," and is "intended for use in electronic mail,
electronic funds transfer, electronic data interchange, software
distribution, data storage, and other applications which require
data integrity assurance and data origin authentication."/1/

        With governmental and commercial transactions increasingly
dependent upon the reliability and integrity of such
telecommunications applications, authentication techniques are
indispensable.  As NIST's Associate Director for Computer
Security, Lynn McNulty, has said, digital signature technology
"will be an important part of re-engineering the business
practices that we've used for so many years in government and
other parts of society.  ...  The signature will be absolutely
critical in certain areas where, because of statute or practice,
we currently require a written signature on paper."/2/

        While use of the proposed DSS would be mandatory only for
federal agencies, its adoption by the government would have a
substantial impact on the private sector.  Vendors will need to
offer products for the government that meet the federal standard
and are thus likely to design all of their products to conform to
its requirements./3/  Thus, the Data Encryption Standard ("DES"),
which was adopted by NIST's predecessor, the National Bureau of
Standards, as a government standard in 1977, was quickly adopted
by the American National Standards Institute and became the
worldwide industry standard.

        In its Federal Register notice, NIST stated that it had
selected the DSS after evaluating several alternatives and that
the agency had "followed the mandate contained in section 2 of the
Computer Security Act of 1987 that NIST develop standards and
guidelines to ' ... assure the cost-effective security and privacy
of sensitive information in Federal systems.'"/4/

        The reference to the Computer Security Act was significant
because, in enacting the statute, Congress sought to vest civilian
computer security authority in NIST and to limit the role of the
National Security Agency ("NSA")./5/  When Congress enacted the
legislation, it expressed particular concern that NSA, a military
intelligence agency, would improperly limit public access to
information in a manner incompatible with civilian standard
setting./6/  The House Report notes that NSA's

                natural tendency to restrict and even deny access to
                information that it deems important would disqualify
                that agency from being put in charge of the protection
                of non-national security information in the view of many
                officials in the civilian agencies and the private
                sector.

        NSA's reputation for excessive secrecy is well-known and
well-deserved.  In the years following the Second World War, the
making and breaking of secret codes became increasingly important
to the U.S. national security establishment./7/  The National
Security Agency, based at Fort George C. Meade, Maryland, was
created by order of President Truman in 1952 and tasked with
primary responsibility for communications intelligence (COMINT) --
intercepting and deciphering the secret communications of foreign
governments.  By some accounts, NSA is capable of acquiring and
automatically scanning most, if not all, of the electronic
messages that enter, leave or transit the United States./8/  The
agency itself refuses to confirm or deny published information
concerning its capabilities.

        In the 40 years since its creation, NSA has enjoyed a virtual
monopoly in the area of cryptographic technology within the United
States.  Believing its mission requires that such technology be
closely held, the agency has actively sought to maintain its
monopoly and to suppress the private, non-governmental development
and dissemination of cryptography.  The motivation behind NSA's
efforts to suppress cryptographic know-how is obvious -- as the
ability to securely encrypt information becomes more widespread,
the agency's collection work becomes more difficult and time-
consuming.

        NSA's efforts to maintain its monopoly have extended into the
area of export and trade policy.  The export of software products
containing cryptographic features is governed by the International
Traffic in Arms Regulations ("ITAR"), administered by the Office
of Defense Trade Controls at the Department of State./9/  In
addition to software products specifically designed for military
purposes, the ITAR "Munitions List" includes a wide range of
commercial software containing encryption capabilities./10/  Under
the export licensing scheme, the NSA reviews license applications
for "information security technologies" covered by ITAR./11/

        While the agency denies the charges, industry representatives
claim that NSA-imposed restrictions are stifling innovation in an
area that is increasingly important to the computer industry.
They further contend that the controls on the export of encryption
technology are forcing U.S. companies to lose markets to foreign
competitors.  As economics writer Robert Kuttner has noted,

                [r]estricting the ability of domestic manufacturers
                to commercialize and export new technologies no longer
                assures that advanced technologies will stay out of
                unfriendly hands: it only diverts the business to
                Japanese or European manufacturers who don't share
                America's view of technological security.

                        This has the most far-reaching implications for
                American competitiveness, because it is precisely the
                most militarily sensitive technologies -- super-
                computers, semiconductor architecture and fabrication,
                fiber-optics, advanced machine tools, cryptography --
                that are also key to the competitiveness of America's
                commercial industry./12/

        Considerations of "national security" can also play a role in
the patent system and inhibit the technological innovation that
system is intended to foster.  The Invention Secrecy Act, a
little-known provision enacted in 1952 (the year of NSA's birth),
authorizes the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks to withhold
a patent and order that an invention be kept secret "for such
period as the national interest requires."  Violation of a patent
secrecy order is punishable by two years' imprisonment and a
$10,000 fine./13/  As a Justice Department representative told a
congressional subcommittee in 1980, "[w]hat the Invention Secrecy
Act says in effect is that there are some inventions that are too
dangerous to be disclosed in the way that a patent normally
discloses the invention ...."/14/

        The number of secrecy orders issued under the Invention
Secrecy Act remained relatively constant from 1952 until 1979.
Since then, the number of active secrecy orders has increased: a
total of 4,685 orders were in effect in 1986 compared with 3,513
in 1979./15/  While information concerning the substance of patent
secrecy orders is obviously difficult to obtain, cryptographic
technology clearly has been the subject of many such orders issued
at the insistence of NSA./16/  These restrictions in effect exempt
cryptography from the underlying purpose of the patent system: to
"stimulate ideas and the eventual development of further
significant advances in the art."/17/  NSA's objective has been to
suppress, rather than stimulate, advances in civilian
cryptography.

        As noted, Congress was cognizant of NSA's propensity toward
excessive secrecy when it passed the Computer Security Act and
sought to remove the impediments to technological innovation in
the civilian sector.  Congress specifically intended to "greatly
restrict" the influence of the military intelligence agencies
"while at the same time providing a statutory mandate for a strong
security program headed up by [NIST], a civilian agency."/18/  The
House Report on the legislation noted that NSA's involvement in
the development of civilian computer standards

                could have a chilling effect on the vigorous research
                and development that is on-going in the academic
                community and our domestic computer industry.  This
                industry has been one of the most viable segments of our
                economy.  Its rapid technological advances have been due
                in large part to being free to openly exchange ideas
                without government interference.  NSA's inherent
                tendency to classify everything at its highest level is
                bound to conflict with this broader goal.

        The development of the digital signature standard is, to a
large extent, the first real test of the Computer Security Act.
Unfortunately, information that has recently come to light
suggests that the barrier Congress sought to erect between the
civilian and military agencies can easily be breached.

        The Federal Register notice announcing the proposed DSS last
August made no explicit reference to NSA and clearly implied that
NIST had developed the standard.  In an effort to analyze the
federal standard setting process, Computer Professionals for
Social Responsibility ("CPSR") submitted a Freedom of Information
Act request to NIST for records related to DSS.  In response to
the request, the agency initially asserted that

                all of the materials related to the evaluation of
                technology in choosing a digital signature standard for
                computer security are documents that are advisory and
                predecisional in nature, and are therefore exempt from
                disclosure under [FOIA].  In addition, some of the
                materials pertain to pending patent applications and are
                withheld under [FOIA] ... [and] are also protected under
                the provisions of [patent law]./19/

        After CPSR filed suit in federal court to compel disclosure
of the DSS materials, NIST acknowledged for the first time that
the bulk of relevant documents in its possession in fact
originated with NSA -- 142 pages of material were created by NIST
while 1,138 pages were created by NSA./20/  For reasons not
explained by the agency, NIST dropped its FOIA exemption claims
and released 140 pages of its own material and referred the
remaining documents to NSA for processing.

        In response to news media scrutiny, NSA has now also
acknowledged the leading role it played in developing the proposed
DSS.  In a letter to MacWeek magazine, NSA's Chief of Information
Policy acknowledged that the agency "evaluated and provided
candidate algorithms including the one ultimately selected by
NIST."/21/  While NSA steadfastly insists that its role in
developing the digital signature standard is consistent with the
letter of the Computer Security Act, the fact that the agency
actually "provided" the DSS algorithm to NIST raises questions as
to whether the spirit of the legislation has been followed.

        At least one authoritative observer does not believe it has.
Rep. Jack Brooks, who was a driving force behind the Computer
Security Act while serving as Chairman of the House Government
Operations Committee (and who now serves as Chairman of the
Judiciary Committee), recently held hearings on DSS.  He noted
that

                [u]nder the Computer Security Act of 1987, the
                Department of Commerce [through NIST] has primary
                responsibility for establishing computer security
                standards including those dealing with cryptography.
                However, many in industry are concerned that in spite
                of the Act, the NSA continues to control the Commerce
                Department's work in this area.  For example, Commerce
                (at the urging of the National Security Agency) has
                proposed  a "digital signature standard" (DSS) that has
                been severely criticized by the computer and
                telecommunications industry./22/

        The criticism of DSS alluded to by Rep. Brooks goes to the
heart of the matter -- whether NSA's involvement in the standard
setting process has resulted in the adoption of a flawed standard.
Comments submitted to NIST by industry and academic cryptography
experts were overwhelmingly critical of the proposed DSS.  The
vast majority of these experts expressed the view that the
proposed standard is inferior to the established and widely used
RSA public-key technology, which many have characterized as the de
facto international standard./23/

        Professor Martin Hellman of Stanford University, the co-
inventor of public-key cryptography, wrote that he was "deeply
concerned by faults in the technical specifications of the
proposed DSS and by its development process."  He noted that

                NIST has lost considerable credibility with the non-
                military cryptographic research community and, unless
                the revision process of DSS is carried out in a much
                more rapid and open fashion, NIST is likely to become
                totally ineffective in the setting of cryptographic
                standards./24/

        NIST documents released to CPSR under the Freedom of
Information Act suggest that the agency's own experts recognized
the superiority of the existing RSA technology and its status as
an emerging de facto authentication standard.  An internal NIST
evaluation of existing technology conducted in late 1989 noted
that the RSA technique is "widely known and widely used" and is "a
most versatile public-key cryptosystem."/25/  Indeed, IEEE Spectrum
magazine recently reported that the RSA technique

                had been readied by NIST as the [federal] standard for
                several months and was dropped in December 1989 with no
                alternative in sight.  Not until early spring of 1991
                did NSA present the algorithm of choice to NIST.  Even
                on background, sources declined to detail reasons behind
                the decision, although one mentioned that legitimate
                national security factors had come into play./26/

        The questions surrounding DSS -- both technical and
procedural -- are so significant that even NIST's Computer System
Security and Privacy Advisory Board has expressed reservations
about the proposed standard.  The Board has called for a "national
level public review" of cryptography policy and has deferred
approval of the proposed DSS "pending progress on the national
review."/27/  The Undersecretary of Commerce for Technology, Dr.
Robert M. White, agreed with the Board's recommendation and called
upon NIST to organize a public workshop on cryptography issues.  A
three-day session is scheduled to begin on September 15 at NIST's
headquarters in Gaithersburg, Maryland.

        This review of national cryptography policy comes at a
critical time.  In the Cold War atmosphere that prevailed for 45
years, cryptography was seen as a vital national interest and most
policymakers were willing to permit the National Security Agency
and the military establishment to maintain a monopoly in the
field.  With the end of the Cold War, the military and
intelligence considerations have changed.  Indeed, Congress
recognized the need for reform when it enacted the Computer
Security Act in 1987, even before the demise of the Soviet Union.

        Electronic communications are now widely used in the civilian
sector and have become an integral component of the global
economy.  Computers store and exchange an ever increasing amount
of highly personal information, including medical and financial
data.  In this electronic environment, the need for privacy-
enhancing technologies is apparent.  Communications applications
such as electronic mail and electronic funds transfers require
secure means of encryption and authentication -- goals that can be
achieved only through the robust development and dissemination of
cryptographic technology free of military interference.  To that
end, the role of the National Security Agency in civilian
cryptography should be eliminated and NIST should be granted the
authority and resources to assist, rather than hinder, the
development of civilian cryptography in the United States.

*Footnotes*

1       56 Fed. Reg. 42981 (August 30, 1991).

2     "Lynn McNulty on Infosecurity Standards: A Talk with NIST's
Protection Point Man,"  ISPNews, (September/October 1992) at 6.

3       See Wright, The Law of Electronic Commerce (Little, Brown 1991)
at 192-193.

4       56 Fed. Reg. 42981 (August 30, 1991).

5      See "The Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L. 100-235) and the
Memorandum of Understanding Between the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) and the National Security Agency
(NSA)," the Subcommittee on Legislation and National Security,
Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives, May
4, 1989 (testimony of Marc Rotenberg, CPSR Washington Office
Director) reprinted in Military and Security Control of Computer
Security Issues, 101st Cong., 1st Sess. (1989) at 80.

6     H. Rep. No. 153 (Part 2), 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 21 (1987).

7     See generally Kahn, The Codebreakers (Macmillan 1967).

8     Burnham, The Rise of the Computer State  (Random House 1980), at
126.  See generally Bamford, The Puzzle Palace (Houghton Mifflin
1982); "The National Security Agency and Fourth Amendment Rights,"
Hearings before the Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, 94th Cong.,
1st Sess. (1975).

9     22 CFR Parts 120-130.

10      See generally, Greguras and Black, "The Encryption Export Maze:
Red Tape, Requirements, Restrictions," INFOSecurity Product News
(June 1992).

11      Adam, "Cryptography = Privacy?," IEEE Spectrum, August 1992 at
34 (reprinted statement of NSA).

12      Kuttner, "Spooks and Science: An American Dilemma," The
Washington Post, August 20, 1989, at B8.  See, also Kuttner, "How
'National Security' Hurts National Competitiveness," Harvard
Business Review, January - February 1991, at 140.

13     35 U.S.C. $ 181 et seq.

14     "The Government's Classification of Private Ideas," Hearings
before a Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government
Operations, 96th Cong., 2d Sess. (1980) (hereinafter cited as
"Private Ideas") at 258 (testimony of H. Miles Foy, Office of
Legal Counsel, Department of Justice).

15     Hausken, "The Value of a Secret: Compensation for Imposition of
Secrecy Orders under the Invention Secrecy Act," 119 Military Law
Review (Winter 1988) at 202 n.10 (446 new orders were issued in
1986 compared with 293 in 1979).

16     See "Private Ideas" at 406-431; see also Gilbert, "Patent
Secrecy Orders: The Unconstitutionality of Interference in
Civilian Cryptography under Present Procedures," 22 Santa Clara
Law Review 325 (1982).

17     Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470, 481 (1974).

18     H. Rep. No. 153 (Part 2), 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 7 (1987).

19      Letter from NIST to CPSR dated September 11, 1991.

20     CPSR v. NIST, Civil Action No. 92-0972 (D.D.C.) (agency
affidavits filed in support of motion to stay proceedings).

21     Letter from Michael S. Conn (NSA) to Mitch Ratcliffe (MacWeek),
October 31, 1991.

22     Opening Statement of Rep. Jack Brooks, Threat of Foreign
Economic Espionage to U.S. Corporations, House Judiciary
Subcommittee on Economic and Commercial Law, May 7, 1992 at 2.

23     See, e.g., Comments submitted to NIST by Fischer International
Systems Corp., dated November 26, 1991.  See also "Debating
Encryption Standards," Communications of the ACM, July 1992 at 34
("After years of testing and proven reliability, RSA is now used
by the majority of software makers around the world, including
IBM, Apple, Lotus, Sun and Microsoft").

24     Comments submitted to NIST by Professor Martin E. Hellman,
dated November 12, 1991, reprinted in Communications of the ACM,
July 1992 at 47-49.

25     Memorandum from Roy Saltman to Lynn McNulty dated December 22,
1989.

26     Adam, "Cryptography = Privacy?," IEEE Spectrum, August 1992 at
29.

27     Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board,
Resolutions No. 1 and 3, March 18, 1992.




