                          Federal Information
                 Processing Standards Publication 46-2

                           1993 December 30

                            Announcing the

                     DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES)

Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS)
are issued by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to Section
111(d) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of
1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law
100-235.

1.   Name of Standard.  Data Encryption Standard (DES).

2.   Category of Standard.  Computer Security.

3.   Explanation.  The Data Encryption Standard (DES) specifies
a FIPS approved cryptographic algorithm as required by FIPS
140-1.  This publication provides a complete description of a
mathematical algorithm for encrypting (enciphering) and
decrypting (deciphering) binary coded information.  Encrypting
data converts it to an unintelligible form called cipher. 
Decrypting cipher converts the data back to its original form 
called plaintext.  The algorithm described in this standard
specifies both enciphering and deciphering operations which are
based on a binary number called a key.

A key consists of 64 binary digits ("O"s or "1"s) of which 56
bits are randomly generated and used directly by the algorithm. 
The other 8 bits, which are not used by the algorithm, are used
for error detection.  The 8 error detecting bits are set to make
the parity of each 8-bit byte of the key odd, i.e., there is an
odd number of "1"s in each 8-bit byte.  Authorized users of
encrypted computer data must have the key that was used to
encipher the data in order to decrypt it.  The encryption
algorithm specified in this standard is commonly known among
those using the standard.  The unique key chosen for use in a
particular application makes the results of encrypting
data using the algorithm unique.  Selection of a different key
causes the cipher that is produced for any given set of inputs to
be different.  The cryptographic security of the data depends on
the security provided for the key used to encipher and decipher
the data.

Data can be recovered from cipher only by using exactly the same
key used to encipher it.  Unauthorized recipients of the cipher
who know the algorithm but do not have the correct key cannot
derive the original data algorithmically.  However, anyone who
does have the key and the algorithm can easily decipher the
cipher and obtain the original data.  A standard algorithm
based on a secure key thus provides a basis for exchanging
encrypted computer data by issuing the key used to encipher it to
those authorized to have the data.

Data that is considered sensitive by the responsible authority,
data that has a high value, or data that represents a high value
should be cryptographically protected if it is vulnerable to
unauthorized disclosure or undetected modification during
transmission or while in storage.  A risk analysis should be
performed under the direction of a responsible authority to
determine potential threats.  The costs of providing
cryptographic protection using this standard as well as
alternative methods of providing this protection and their
respective costs should be projected.  A responsible authority
then should make a decision, based on these analyses, whether or
not to use cryptographic protection and this standard.

4.   Approving Authority.  Secretary of Commerce.

5.   Maintenance Agency.  U.S. Department of Commerce, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Systems
Laboratory.

6.   Applicability. This standard may be used by Federal
departments and agencies when the following conditions apply:

     1. An authorized official or manager responsible for data
     security or the security of any computer system decides that
     cryptographic protection is required; and

     2. The data is not classified according to the National
     Security Act of 1947, as amended, or the Atomic Energy Act
     of 1954, as amended.

Federal agencies or departments which use cryptographic devices
for protecting data classified according to either of these acts
can use those devices for protecting unclassified data in lieu
of the standard.

Other FIPS approved cryptographic algorithms may be used in
addition to, or in lieu of, this standard when implemented in
accordance with FIPS 140-1.

In addition, this standard may be adopted and used by non-Federal
Government organizations.  Such use is encouraged when it
provides the desired security for commercial and private
organizations.

7.   Applications.  Data encryption (cryptography) is utilized
in various applications and environments.  The specific
utilization of encryption and the implementation of the DES will
be based on many factors particular to the computer system and
its associated components.  In general, cryptography is used to
protect data while it is being communicated between two points or
while it is stored in a medium vulnerable to physical theft. 
Communication security provides protection to data by enciphering
it at the transmitting point and deciphering it at the receiving
point.  File security provides protection to data by enciphering
it when it is recorded on a storage medium and deciphering it
when it is read back from the storage medium.  In the first case,
the key must be available at the transmitter and receiver
simultaneously during communication.  In the second case, the key
must be maintained and accessible for the duration of the storage
period.  FIPS 171 provides approved methods for managing the keys
used by the algorithm specified in this standard.

8.   Implementations. Cryptographic modules which implement this
standard shall conform to the requirements of FIPS 140-1.  The
algorithm specified in this standard may be implemented in
software, firmware, hardware, or any combination thereof.  The
specific implementation may depend on several factors such as the
application, the environment, the technology used, etc. 
Implementations which may comply with this standard include
electronic devices (e.g., VLSI chip packages), micro-processors
using Read Only Memory (ROM), Programmable Read Only Memory
(PROM), or Electronically Erasable Read Only Memory (EEROM), and
mainframe computers using Random Access Memory (RAM).  When
the algorithm is implemented in software or firmware, the
processor on which the algorithm runs must be specified as part
of the validation process.  Implementations of the algorithm
which are tested and validated by NIST will be considered as
complying with the standard.  Note that FIPS 140-1 places
additional requirements on cryptographic modules for
Government use.  Information about devices that have been
validated and procedures for testing and validating equipment for
conformance with this standard and FIPS 140-1 are available from
the National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer
Systems Laboratory, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.
  
9.   Export Control.  Cryptographic devices and technical data
regarding them are subject to Federal Government export controls
as specified in Title 22, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 120
through 128.  Some exports of cryptographic modules implementing
this standard and technical data regarding them must comply with
these Federal regulations and be licensed by the U.S. Department
of State.  Other exports of cryptographic modules implementing
this standard and technical data regarding them fall under the
licensing authority of the Bureau of Export Administration of the
U.S. Department of Commerce.  The Department of Commerce is
responsible for licensing cryptographic devices used for
authentication, access control, proprietary software, automatic
teller machines (ATMs), and certain devices used in other
equipment and software.  For advice concerning which agency has
licensing authority for a particular cryptographic device, please
contact the respective agencies.  

10.  Patents.  Cryptographic devices implementing this standard
may be covered by U.S. and foreign patents issued to the
International Business Machines Corporation.  However, IBM has
granted nonexclusive, royalty-free licenses under the patents to
make, use and sell apparatus which complies with the standard. 
The terms, conditions and scope of the licenses are set out in
notices published in the May 13, 1975 and August 31, 1976 issues
of the Official Gazette of the United States Patent and Trademark
Office (934 O.G. 452 and 949 O.G. 1717).

11.  Alternative Modes of Using the DES.  FIPS PUB 81, DES Modes
of Operation, describes four different modes for using the
algorithm described in this standard.  These four modes are
called the Electronic Codebook (ECB) mode, the Cipher Block
Chaining (CBC) mode, the Cipher Feedback (CFB) mode, and the
Output Feedback (OFB) mode.  ECB is a direct application of the
DES algorithm to encrypt and decrypt data; CBC is an enhanced
mode of ECB which chains together blocks of cipher text; CFB uses
previously generated cipher text as input to the DES to generate
pseudorandom outputs which are combined with the plaintext to
produce cipher, thereby chaining together the resulting cipher;
OFB is identical to CFB except that the previous output of the
DES is used as input in OFB while the previous cipher is used as
input in CFB.  OFB does not chain the cipher.

12.  Implementation of this standard.  This standard became
effective July 1977.  It was reaffirmed in 1983, 1988, and 1993. 
It applies to all Federal agencies, contractors of Federal
agencies, or other organizations that process information (using
a computer or telecommunications system) on behalf of the Federal
Government to accomplish a Federal function.   Each Federal
agency or department may issue internal directives for the use of
this standard by their operating units based on their data
security requirement determinations.  FIPS 46-2 which revises the
implementation of the Data Encryption Algorithm to include
software, firmware, hardware, or any combination thereof, is
effective June 30, 1994.  This revised standard may be used in
the interim period before the effective date.

NIST provides technical assistance to Federal agencies in
implementing data encryption through the issuance of guidelines
and through individual reimbursable projects.  The National
Security Agency assists Federal departments and agencies in
communications security for classified applications and in
determining specific security requirements.  Instructions and
regulations for procuring data processing equipment utilizing
this standard are included in the Federal Information Resources
Management Regulation (FIRMR) Subpart 201-8.111-1.

13.  Specifications.  Federal Information Processing Standard
(FIPS) 46-2, Data Encryption Standard (DES) (affixed).

14.  Cross Index.
     a.   Federal Information Resources Management Regulations
          (FIRMR) subpart 201.20.303, Standards, and subpart
          201.39.1002, Federal Standards.
     b.   FIPS PUB 31, Guidelines to ADP Physical Security and
          Risk Management.
     c.   FIPS PUB 41, Computer Security Guidelines for
          Implementing the Privacy Act of 1974.
     d.   FIPS PUB 65, Guideline for Automatic Data Processing
          Risk Analysis.
     e.   FIPS PUB 73, Guidelines for Security of Computer
          Applications.
     f.   FIPS PUB 74, Guidelines for Implementing and Using the
          NBS Data Encryption Standard.
     g.   FIPS PUB 81, DES Modes of Operation.
     h.   FIPS PUB 87, Guidelines for ADP Contingency Planning.
     i.   FIPS PUB 112, Password Usage.
     j.   FIPS PUB 113, Computer Data Authentication.
     k.   FIPS PUB 140-1, Security Requirements for Cryptographic
          Modules.
     l.   FIPS PUB 171, Key Management Using ANSI X9.17.
     m.   Other FIPS and Federal Standards are applicable to the
          implementation and use of this standard.  In
          particular, the Code for Information Interchange, Its
          Representations, Subsets, and Extensions (FIPS PUB 1-2)
          and other related data storage media or data
          communications standards should be used in conjunction
          with this standard.  A list of currently approved FIPS
          may be obtained from the National Institute of
          Standards and Technology, Computer Systems Laboratory,
          Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

15.  Qualifications.  The cryptographic algorithm specified in
this standard transforms a 64-bit binary value into a unique
64-bit binary value based on a 56-bit variable.  If the complete
64-bit input is used (i.e., none of the input bits should be
predetermined from block to block) and if the 56-bit variable is
randomly chosen, no technique other than trying all possible keys
using known input and output for the DES will guarantee finding
the chosen key.  As there are over 70,000,000,000,000,000
(seventy quadrillion) possible keys of 56 bits, the feasibility
of deriving a particular key in this way is extremely unlikely in
typical threat environments.  Moreover, if the key is changed
frequently, the risk of this event is greatly diminished. 
However, users should be aware that it is theoretically possible
to derive the key in fewer trials (with a correspondingly lower
probability of success depending on the number of keys tried) and
should be cautioned to change the key as often as practical. 
Users must change the key and provide it a high level of
protection in order to minimize the potential risks of its
unauthorized computation or acquisition.  The feasibility of
computing the correct key may change with advances in technology.

A more complete description of the strength of this algorithm
against various threats is contained in FIPS PUB 74, Guidelines
for Implementing and Using the NBS Data Encryption Standard.

When correctly implemented and properly used, this standard will
provide a high level of cryptographic protection to computer
data.  NIST, supported by the technical assistance of Government
agencies responsible for communication security, has determined
that the algorithm specified in this standard will provide a high
level of protection for a time period beyond the normal life
cycle of its associated equipment.  The protection provided by
this algorithm against potential new threats will be reviewed
within 5 years to assess its adequacy (See Special Information
Section).  In addition, both the standard and possible threats
reducing the security provided through the use of this standard
will undergo continual review by NIST and other cognizant Federal
organizations.  The new technology available at that time will be
evaluated to determine its impact on the standard.  In addition,
the awareness of any breakthrough in technology or any
mathematical weakness of the algorithm will cause NIST to
reevaluate this standard and provide necessary revisions.

At the next review (1998), the algorithm specified in this
standard will be over twenty years old.  NIST will consider
alternatives which offer a higher level of security.  One of
these alternatives may be proposed as a replacement standard at
the 1998 review.

16.  Comments.  Comments and suggestions regarding this standard
and its use are welcomed and should be addressed to the National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Attn: Director, Computer
Systems Laboratory, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

17.  Waiver Procedure. Under certain exceptional circumstances,
the heads of Federal departments and agencies may approve waivers
to Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS).  The head of
such agency may redelegate such authority only to a senior
official designated pursuant to section 3506(b) of Title 44,
United States Code.  Waiver shall be granted only when:

 a.  Compliance with a standard would adversely affect the
     accomplishment of the mission of  an operator of a Federal
     computer system; or

 b.  Compliance with a standard would cause a major adverse
     financial impact on the operator  which is not offset by
     Government-wide savings.

Agency heads may act upon a written waiver request containing the
information detailed above.  Agency heads may also act without a
written waiver request when they determine that conditions for
meeting the standard cannot be met.  Agency heads may approve
waivers only by a written decision which explains the basis on
which the agency head made the required finding(s).  A copy of
each decision, with procurement sensitive or classified portions
clearly identified, shall be sent to: National Institute of
Standards and Technology; ATTN: FIPS Waiver Decisions, Technology
Building, Room B-154, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

In addition, notice of each waiver granted and each delegation of
authority to approve waivers shall be sent promptly to the
Committee on Government Operations of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Government Affairs of the
Senate and shall be published promptly in the Federal Register.

When the determination on a waiver applies to the procurement of
equipment and/or services, a notice of the waiver determination
must be published in the Commerce Business Daily as a part of the
notice of solicitation for offers of an acquisition or, if the
waiver determination is made after that notice is published, by
amendment to such notice.

A copy of the waiver, any supporting documents, the document
approving the waiver and any accompanying documents, with such
deletions as the agency is authorized and decides to make under 5
United States Code Section 552(b), shall be part of the
procurement documentation and retained by the agency.

18.  Special Information.  In accordance with the Qualifications
Section of this standard, reviews of this standard have been
conducted every 5 years since its adoption in 1977.  The standard
was reaffirmed during each of those reviews.  This revision to
the text of the standard contains changes which allow software
implementations of the algorithm and which permit the use of
other FIPS approved cryptographic algorithms.

19.  Where to Obtain Copies of the Standard. Copies of this
publication are for sale by the National Technical Information
Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA 22161. 
When ordering, refer to Federal Information Processing Standards
Publication 46-2 (FIPS PUB 46-2), and identify the title.  When
microfiche is desired, this should be specified.  Prices are
published by NTIS in current catalogs and other issuances. 
Payment may be made by check, money order, deposit account or
charged to a credit card accepted by NTIS.



--- End Included Message ---



