PGP for Personal Privacy, Version 5.5.3
Windows 95/NT Release Notes
11/24/97

Warning:  Export of this software may be restricted by the US government.

Notes:


* Mismatching your keyring files can result in data loss.  Your public keyring file
  and private keyring file must be kept in sync.  If for instance you select a public
  keyring file which does not contain the public portion of your private key and do not
  also change the private keyring to the corresponding file, you and others will not be
  able to encrypt to exported versions of your key after that time.  In most cases,
  simply updating your key from a public copy on a keyserver will fix this.  However, it
  is recommended that the keyring files always be kept in sync.  A future version is
  expected to correct this issue.

* When using shortcuts, the Windows explorer only tells us about the target of a shortcut
  and not the shortcut itself.  If you use the Wipe feature in the Explorer, the shortcut 
  itself will not be wiped.  The actual target will be wiped.  When using PGPtools, the
  shortcut will be wiped.

* When using this product with Eudora 4, the PGP preference setting of "Automatically
  decrypt/verify when opening messages", located in the "Email" tab, does not function. 

* This product does not generate RSA keys.


How to read the manual:

The manual is distributed in Adobe Acrobat format (.pdf).  Free readers are available for 
this format on nearly every platform including Macintosh, Windows, DOS, SUN Sparc, HP/UX,
SGI, AIX, and others from the following web site:

http://www.adobe.com/acrobat/


This format allows us to provide you with exactly the same formatting and appearance as the
manual was designed to have, and allows everyone to read it.  It also prints to any
postscript printer equally well.


Reporting Bugs:

Please send any problems, comments, or suggestions for this product to pgp55support@pgp.com.
Please see our website for further instructions and please have your registration number
handy.

We hope you enjoy using this new generation of PGP encryption!

Thanks!
The PGP 5.5 Development Team


(C)1997 Pretty Good Privacy, Inc.   All rights reserved.
